Copyright Government of Botswana
CHAPTER 65:07
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS
PART I
Preliminary
SECTION
1. Short title
2. Interpretation
3. Application of Act
4. Requirements to undertake an activity
5. Ensuring issuance of authorisation
PART II
Preparation of environmental impact assessment documentation
6. Requirement for authorisation
7. Public participation and scoping exercise
8. Terms of reference
9. Environmental impact assessment and statement
10. Form and content of statement
11. Registration and qualifications of consultants
PART III
Review process of environmental impact statement
12. Public review of statement
13. Conduct of public hearing
14. Approval of statement
15. Appeals
PART IV
Authorisation of a statement
16. Validity of an authorisation
17. Revocation or modification of authorisation
18. Transfer of authorisation
19. Decision making by competent authority
PART V
Post environmental impact assessment of implemented activities
20. Monitoring programme and evaluation report
21. Environmental audit by competent authority
PART VI
Miscellaneous
22. Enforcement of provisions
23. Public documents and register
24. Confidentiality
25. Protection from personal liability
26. Powers of entry
27. Power to require information
28. Trans-boundary environmental impact
29. General penalty
30. Regulations
31. Transitional
32. Act to bind state 
Copyright Government of Botswana
Act 6, 2005.
An Act to provide for environmental impact assessment to be used to assess the
potential effects of planned developmental activities; to determine and to provide
mitigation measures for effects of such activities as may have a significant adverse
impact on the environment; to put in place a monitoring process and evaluation of the
environmental impacts of implemented activities; and to provide for matters incidental to
the foregoing.
[Date of Commencement: 27th May, 2005]
PART I
Preliminary (ss 1-5)
1. Short title
 This Act may be cited as the Environmental Impact Assessment Act.
2. Interpretation
 In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires-
"activity" includes a project, programme or policy;
"authorisation" means a document issued under this Act, where the environmental
impact of an activity is sufficiently described by the application, scoping exercise or an
environmental impact statement, and the proposed mitigation for the impact are acceptable;
"competent authority", in relation to an activity under this Act, means the Department;
"consultant" has the meaning assigned to it under section 11;
"Department" means the Department of Environment and Conservation;
"developer" means an applicant authorised to undertake an activity;
"Director" means the Director of the Department of Environment and Conservation;
"environment" includes the physical, ecological, archaeological, aesthetic, cultural,
economic, institutional, human health and social aspects of the surroundings of a person;
"environmental audit" means work done to identify and evaluate compliance of the
statement and the residual environmental impact of an existing activity, the effectiveness of
mitigation measures and the functioning of monitoring mechanisms;
"environmental impact" means any positive or negative effects caused by an activity
on the environment;
"environmental impact assessment" means the process and procedure for evaluating
and predicting the likely environmental impact of a proposed activity;
"evaluation report" means a report on studies carried out to ensure that environmental
considerations are taken into account when an activity is implemented;
"local authority" includes a land board;
"mitigation measures" means the reduction or control of the adverse environmental
impact of an activity and includes restitution for any damage to the environment caused by such
activity through engineering works, technological improvements, management measures or
compensation to ameliorate any loss suffered by a person;
"preliminary environmental impact assessment" means a description of the likely
environmental impacts of an activity provided by the applicant as part of the application;
"relevant technical department" means a government department responsible for
monitoring an activity undertaken under this Act, by virtue of that department having the
necessary technical expertise to do so;
"scoping" means consultations with concerned government departments, local
authorities, non-governmental organisations, members of the public and any other interested
persons, to determine the extent of the likely environmental impact of a proposed activity;
"statement" means a report of the environmental impact assessment study executed in 
Copyright Government of Botswana
accordance with terms of reference approved by the competent authority;
"strategic environmental assessment" means a process for evaluating the
environmental consequences of proposed policy, plan, or programme initiatives in order to
ensure that they are fully included and appropriately addressed at the earliest stage of decision
making, on par with economic and social considerations;
"threshold" in relation to an environmental impact assessment of an activity, means a
measurable level or limit of an output resulting from the operation of a proposed activity
indicative of the activity's environmental impact; and
"terms of reference" means a document which details the main environmental issues
which must be addressed in an environmental impact study.
3. Application of Act
 (1) This Act applies to the activities in respect of which the Minister, may, after
screening them, prescribe by regulations.
(2) Regulations made pursuant to subsection (1) shall prescribe -
(a) a list of activities which are likely to cause significant adverse effects on the
environment, or the locations that may be environmentally sensitive, in respect of which
a statement shall be mandatory;
(b) threshold determinations of environmental impact assessment with respect to the
activities prescribed under paragraph (a); and
(c) criteria which shall be used to determine the likely effects of a proposed activity in order
to further determine whether or not a statement is required for the activity.
(3) In this section, screening'' means an initial stage in the environmental impact
assessment process where the Minister determines whether an activity should be subjected to
an environmental impact assessment or not.
4. Requirements to undertake an activity
 (1) No person shall undertake or implement an activity prescribed under section 3
unless the environmental impact of the proposed activity is fully taken into account in
accordance with the provisions of this Act and authorisation has been issued under section 14.
(2) Any person who undertakes or implements an activity in contravention of subsection
(1) commits an offence and is liable to a fine not exceeding P100,000 or to a term of
imprisonment not exceeding two years or to both.
(3) A person who contravenes subsection (1) shall rehabilitate the area affected by the
adverse environmental impact of the implemented activity.
(4) In this section, "rehabilitate" means the reinstatement or restoration to a normal or
functional environmental state.
(5) A person who contravenes subsection (3) commits an offence and is liable to a fine
not exceeding P15,000 or to a term of imprisonment not exceeding 2 years or to both.
(6) In the case of a continued contravention in respect of a person convicted under
subsection (2) or (5), that person is liable to a further fine not exceeding P2,000 for every day on
which the offence continues.
5. Ensuring issuance of authorisation
 (1) A licensing authority shall, before issuing a permit, licence, consent or approval to
any person who has applied to implement an activity prescribed under section 3, ensure that
authorisation has been issued for the proposed activity in accordance with this Act.
(2) In this section, "licensing authority" means any authority vested with the responsibility
of issuing licenses for any of the activities prescribed under section 3.
PART II
Preparation of environmental impact assessment documentation (ss 6-11)
6. Requirement for authorisation
 (1) Every-
(a) application made to obtain authorisation for a proposed activity shall contain or be 
Copyright Government of Botswana
accompanied by a preliminary environmental impact assessment which shall include a
description of the activity; and
(b) formulation of a policy or programme, shall contain or be accompanied by an approved
strategic environmental assessment, which strategic environmental assessment shall
contain a description of the proposed policy or programme.
(2) An application made under subsection (1) (a) shall be in the prescribed form and
shall be accompanied by such fee as may be prescribed.
(3) Where the competent authority is satisfied that all relevant information is available in
the application and that the activity can be carried out without any adverse environmental
impact, the competent authority shall authorise the implementation of the activity.
(4) Where the competent authority finds that information provided in the application is
insufficient, the competent authority shall require and specify to the applicant the additional
information to be provided.
7. Public participation and scoping exercise
 (1) An applicant shall take all measures necessary to seek the views of the people or
communities which are likely to be affected by the activity.
(2) In seeking the views of the people or communities in accordance with subsection (1)
the applicant shall-
(a) publicise the intended activity, its effects and benefits in the mass media using the
official languages for a period of not less than 21 days; and
(b) after the expiration of the period of 21 days, hold meetings with the affected people or
communities to explain the activity and its effects.
8. Terms of reference
 (1) Where, upon a consideration of all the information submitted by the applicant, the
competent authority decides that an environmental impact assessment is required, the authority
shall inform the applicant, in writing, to prepare terms of reference for the environmental impact
assessment, which terms of reference shall be in the prescribed form.
(2) An applicant shall, after complying with section 7 and subsection (1) of this section,
submit the terms of reference and the results of the scoping exercise to the competent authority.
(3) In considering the terms of reference, the competent authority shall consult with the
relevant technical departments or local authorities, and may-
(a) conduct such investigation as it considers necessary to ascertain the validity of the
scoping exercise of the activity; or
(b) request the applicant to provide additional information for a better understanding of the
terms of reference.
(4) Where the competent authority is satisfied that the terms of reference will adequately
assist in guiding the environmental impact assessment of the proposed activity, the competent
authority shall approve the terms of reference.
(5) Where an applicant requires the services of a consultant to prepare the terms of
reference required in terms of subsection (1), the applicant shall appoint the consultant at the
applicant's own expense.
9. Environmental impact assessment and statement
 (1) Where the competent authority determines that the proposed activity is likely to
have a significant adverse environmental impact, it shall require that such activity undergo an
environmental impact assessment, the costs of which shall be borne by the developer.
(2) An environmental impact assessment shall identify and evaluate the environmental
impact of an activity with particular reference to the-
(a) health, safety or quality of life of people;
(b) archaeological, aesthetic, cultural or sanitary conditions of the environment; and
(c) configuration, quality and diversity of natural resources.
(3) Where the competent authority determines that an environmental impact assessment 
Copyright Government of Botswana
be made under subsection (1), upon being informed in writing about the decision, the applicant
shall, before undertaking or implementing the activity, prepare and submit a statement to the
competent authority within the period of time prescribed in the approved terms of reference.
(4) A person who contravenes subsection (3) commits an offence and is liable to a fine
not exceeding P100,000 or to a term of imprisonment not exceeding five years or to both.
10. Form and content of statement
 (1) A statement shall be made in the prescribed form and shall include-
(a) the name of the applicant;
(b) a description of the proposed activity and its purpose;
(c) an outline of alternative sites of the proposed activity including the non-action
alternative;
(d) a description of the likely environmental impact on local environment and
socio-economic consequences;
(e) an environmental management plan;
(f) the time period for which environmental impact is predicted;
(g) an account of the predicted environmental impact and an assessment of each kind of
environmental impact;
(h) a discussion of the distribution of the expected environmental impact;
(i) a description of mitigating measures to keep adverse environmental impact to a
minimum;
(j) a description of residual environmental impact;
(k) a proposed monitoring programme and evaluation exercise;
(l) the potential uses to be prevented or impaired by the proposed activity;
(m) the possible effects of an environmental impact of an activity;
(n) the potential trans-boundary environmental impact of an activity;
(o) a brief, non-technical or executive summary; and
(p) such other relevant information as the Minister may consider necessary.
(2) In this section, "environmental management plan" means a document representing
the administration of efforts that will be made to manage any significant environmental impact
resulting from the implementation of the activity; and
"residual environmental impact" means an environmental impact which arises after the
implementation of mitigation measures for an activity.
11. Registration and qualifications of consultants
 (1) A person shall be qualified to be engaged as a consultant for the purposes of this
Act, if the person -
(a) is registered as a consultant in accordance with the provisions of subsection (2); and
(b) has, in his or her employment, or has access to the services of, persons specialising in
such disciplines as the Minister may prescribe.
(2) Where an individual applies for registration as a consultant under this Act, the
individual shall satisfy the Minister that he or she has obtained by examination, any one of the
disciplines prescribed in terms of subsection (1) and has-
(a) at least two years experience in undertaking environmental assessments, as part of a
team; and
(b) knowledge of the basic processes on the environmental impact assessment process,
and of international guidelines on the preparation of terms of reference and statements.
PART III
Review process of the environmental impact statement (ss 12-15)
12. Public review of statement
 (1) The competent authority shall, within 60 days of receiving a statement from a
developer, examine the statement to determine whether such statement complies with the
requirements of section 10. 
Copyright Government of Botswana
(2) Where the statement complies with the requirements of section 10, the competent
authority shall -
(a) place a notification in the Gazette and in a newspaper circulating at least once weekly,
for four consecutive weeks, inviting comments or objections of those persons who are
most likely to be affected by the proposed activity and other interested persons, stating
the-
 (i) nature and magnitude of the activity,
 (ii) location of the activity,
 (iii) anticipated environmental impact of the activity, and
 (iv) proposed mitigation measures to respond to the negative environmental impact;
and
(b) in its decision making, consider the comments or objections raised by persons who are
likely to be affected by the proposed activity and other interested persons.
13. Conduct of public hearing
 (1) The competent authority may hold a public hearing if-
(a) after examining the statement, the competent authority is of the opinion that the activity
is of such a nature that the public should have the opportunity to make submissions or
comments at a public hearing; or
(b) the public concern over the activity is that the activity may have a significant adverse
impact on the environment.
(2) The Minister may, in consultation with the competent authority, prescribe the
procedure for conducting a public hearing.
(3) The competent authority shall, after a public hearing, consider the findings in
determining the adequacy of the environmental impact statement.
14. Approval of statement
 (1) Where the competent authority's review of the statement is complete, the competent
authority shall-
(a) grant authorisation to the developer, with such terms and conditions as the competent
authority considers necessary, where-
 (i) the competent authority is satisfied that the statement sufficiently identifies the
environmental impact likely to be caused, and
 (ii) the prescribed mitigation measures in the statement, to avert or minimise the
potential adverse environmental impact, are effective and sufficient; or
(b) where the competent authority is of the view that-
 (i) the statement does not sufficiently identify the environmental impact likely to be
caused, or
 (ii) the prescribed mitigation measures to avert or minimise the potential adverse
environmental impact, are insufficient and ineffective, afford the developer an
opportunity to comply with the provisions of the Act; or
(c) reject the statement, where the developer fails to satisfy the conditions under
paragraph (b).
(2) In deferring or rejecting the statement, the competent authority shall furnish the
applicant with a written statement of the reasons for its decision.
(3) An authorisation issued under subsection (1) (a) shall be in the prescribed form and
shall include-
(a) what has been decided;
(b) why the decision has been made; and
(c) how the statement influenced the decision.
(4) The competent authority may, in issuing an authorisation, prescribe, in writing,
specific requirements for monitoring during and after implementation of the proposed activity, by
the technical departments, local authorities and the developer. 
Copyright Government of Botswana
15. Appeals
 A person aggrieved by a decision of the competent authority may appeal to the High
Court within 30 days of receiving the decision of the competent authority.
PART IV
 Authorisation of a statement (ss 16-19)
16. Validity of an authorisation
 An authorisation granted under section 14 (1) (a) shall be valid for such period as may
be stipulated therein and may be subject to renewal at the end of such period.
17. Revocation or modification of authorisation
 (1) The competent authority may revoke or modify an authorisation to implement an
activity where there is an unanticipated irreversible adverse environmental impact, or a
developer fails to comply with any term or condition subject to which the developer's
authorisation was issued.
(2) The competent authority shall not revoke or modify any authorisation granted to a
developer until the competent authority has, by notice in writing, given the opportunity to the
developer concerned, to-
(a) rectify any contravention; or
(b) show cause, within a period not exceeding 21 days from the date of such notice, why
the authorisation should not be so revoked or modified.
(3) The competent authority shall publish a notice of any revocation or modification
made under this section, in two consecutive issues of-
(a) the Gazette; and
(b) two newspapers in circulation in Botswana.
18. Transfer of authorisation
 (1) No person shall transfer, assign or encumber in any way, without the written
consent of the competent authority, an authorisation issued under section 14 (1) (a).
(2) A person who contravenes subsection (1) commits an offence and is liable to a fine
not exceeding P15,000 or to imprisonment for a period not exceeding two years or to both.
19. Decision making by competent authority
 In assessing applications for an authorisation under this Act, and in making a decision
as to whether it ought to issue or renew an authorisation under this Act, the competent authority
shall take into account the contents of the terms of reference, the statement, the
recommendations of other government departments, local authorities and the comments and
objections of interested persons and the public.
PART V
Post environmental impact assessment of implemented activities (ss 20-21)
20. Monitoring programme and evaluation report
 (1) The relevant technical department or local authority, shall, during and after
implementation of an activity, monitor the implementation of the activity to determine compliance
with the agreed mitigation measures.
(2) The developer shall submit an evaluation report to the relevant technical department
or local authority, at such times as the department or local authority shall determine.
21. Environmental audit by competent authority
 (1) The competent authority shall carry out or cause to be carried out biennially at its
own expense, environmental audits for approval and operational purposes.
(2) After carrying out an environmental audit under subsection (1), the competent
authority may require a developer to take-
(a) specific mitigation measures to ensure compliance with predictions made in the
statement; or
(b) mitigation measures to address environmental impacts not anticipated at the time of
the authorisation. 
Copyright Government of Botswana
PART VI
Miscellaneous (ss 22-31)
22. Enforcement of provisions
(1) If a person alleges that any provision of this Act has been, is being, or is likely to be
contravened in relation to him or her, or any other person or group of persons who have a
substantial interest, that person may apply to the High Court for redress.
(2) In subsection (1), interest shall be established in accordance with the common law
rules of standing.
23. Public documents and register
 (1) Any terms of reference, statement, report, decision or any other document produced
under this Act shall be a public document.
(2) The competent authority shall maintain a register of public documents referred to
under subsection (1), which shall be open for public inspection.
24. Confidentiality
 No person appointed, employed or duly authorised by the competent authority, shall
disclose any information which the person acquired in the performance of any duty, or the
exercise of any function under this Act, except for the purposes of the performance of a duty or
the exercise of a function or when lawfully required to do so by a court.
25. Protection from personal liability
 An officer, employee or agent of the competent authority shall not be subject to any
liability, action, claim or demand, for an act done by the officer, employee or agent, bona fide for
the purposes of carrying the provisions of this Act into effect.
26. Powers of entry
 (1) For the purposes of the administration of this Act, an officer of the competent
authority who has been authorised by the Director, in writing, may, without previous notice and
at any time-
(a) enter upon any land or premises for the purposes of undertaking investigations and
inspections to ensure compliance with this Act;
(b) stop, seize and search any vehicle, boat or aircraft, which the officer believes to have
been used in the commission of an offence or to contain anything which might provide
evidence of the offence; or
(c) require the driver of the vehicle, the person in charge of the boat, or the pilot of the
aircraft, referred to in paragraph (b), to furnish the officer with the details of any licence,
permit, authority or permission issued to him under this Act.
(2) A person authorised to act under subsection(1) shall, if so required, produce
evidence of the authorisation signed by the Director.
(3) Any person who wilfully obstructs a person authorised to exercise the powers under
this section, or who gives information which he knows or ought reasonably to know is false,
commits an offence and is liable to a fine not exceeding P15,000 or to imprisonment for a term
not exceeding two years or to both.
(4) Any power conferred by this section shall be construed as including power to search
for the purpose of ascertaining the environmental impact of the activity.
27. Power to require information
(1) A person duly authorised under section 26 may, for the purpose of ensuring
compliance with this Act, require the owner or occupier of any premises to provide any
information which may be required for the purposes of this Act.
(2) Any person who-
(a) refuses to give the information required under subsection (1); or
(b) gives information which is false or misleading,
commits an offence and is liable to a fine not exceeding P10,000 or to imprisonment for a term
not exceeding one year or to both. 
Copyright Government of Botswana
28. Trans-boundary environmental impact
 (1) Where a proposed activity is likely to have a significant adverse environmental
impact in another country, the competent authority shall consult the Minister.
(2) The Minister shall, through the Minister responsible for foreign affairs, inform the
country concerned about the intended activity, by sending to that country's Minister responsible
for foreign affairs, the terms of reference or a statement, and any other relevant information.
(3) This section applies to any country-
(a) in respect of which the Minister, having regard to any reciprocal provisions under the
laws of that country, so directs; or
(b) that is a party to an international agreement or treaty to which Botswana is a party, has
acceded to or ratified, where the parties to the international agreement or treaty are
obliged to so inform one another.
29. General penalty
 Any person who contravenes the provisions of this Act for which no penalty is otherwise
provided and is convicted of an offence shall be liable to a fine not exceeding P15,000 or to a
term of imprisonment not exceeding two years or to both.
30. Regulations
 The Minister may make regulations for any matter which under this Act is to be
prescribed or for the better carrying out of the provisions of this Act, and without prejudice to the
generality of the foregoing, such regulations may make provision for-
(a) guidelines for the scoping exercise;
(b) a list of activities or environmentally sensitive areas for which a statement is
mandatory, criteria for determining whether a statement is required and threshold
determinations of environmental impact assessment to activities;
(c) qualifications to conduct an environmental impact assessment;
(d) forms and content of terms of reference or statement;
(e) the manner of preparing the terms of reference, statement, monitoring programme or
evaluation report;
(f) reviewing of the terms of reference, the statement, the monitoring programme, the
evaluation report and the environmental audit report;
(g) the manner of holding public hearings;
(h) revoking or modifying an authorisation issued under this Act;
(i) the manner in which entry into premises may be achieved to investigate or evaluate an
environmental impact, or to monitor and audit the environmental impact of an activity;
and
(j) the trans-boundary environmental impact of an activity.
31. Transitional
 (1) Where on the coming into force of this Act, a person is actively engaged in an
activity prescribed under section 3, the person may continue to engage in that activity without an
authorisation under this Act for a period of 12 months from the coming into force of the Act.
(2) A person referred to under subsection (1) shall, within the twelve months referred to,
apply for authorisation in accordance with the provisions of this Act.
(3) A person who contravenes subsection (2) commits an offence and is liable to a fine
not exceeding P100,000 or to imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years or to both.
32. Act to bind State
 This Act binds the State.
CHAPTER 72:01
BOTSWANA POSTAL SERVICES
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS
SECTION 
Copyright Government of Botswana
PART I
Preliminary
1. Short title and commencement
2. Interpretation
PART II
Establishment of Botswana Postal Services and Board of Management
3. Establishment of Botswana Postal Services
4. Establishment of Board
5. Resignation and removal from office
6. Tenure of office
7. Payment of members
PART III
Meetings and Proceedings of Board
8. Meetings
9. Signification of documents
PART IV
Officers, Employees and Agents of the Post
10. Appointment of officers and employees
11. Delegation to committee
PART V
Functions, Powers and Duties of the Post
12. Functions and powers
13. Exclusive privilege of the Post
14. Co-operation with authorities
15. Research and records
16. Power of Minister to give directions
PART VI
Finances
17. Principles of financial operations
18. Fixing of tariffs
19. Borrowing powers
20. Vesting of property in the Post
21. Accounts and audit
PART VII
General
22. Annual report
23. Compulsory acquisition of land
24. Resettlement measures
25. Compensation for loss or damage
26. Power to call for information
27. Power of Board to make bye-laws
28. Transitional provisions
PART VIII
Transmission of Postal Articles
29. Registration of postal articles
30. When postal articles deemed to be in course of transmission or to be posted or
delivered 
Copyright Government of Botswana
31. Redirection and interception of postal articles
32. Articles deemed to be posted in contravention of Act
33. Articles to be sent by postmasters to Returned Letter Office for disposal
34. Articles other than letters may be opened for examination
35. Treatment of unclaimed letters in Returned Letter Office
36. Unclaimed articles of value and articles posted in contravention of Act
37. Sender of undelivered article liable for all charges due
38. Delay, return to sender or delivery to other than addressee of article prohibited
39. Undelivered articles of no value and newspapers may be destroyed
40. Articles addressed to insolvent person
41. Articles addressed to deceased person
42. Articles addressed to persons conducting lottery or dealing in indecent or obscene
matter
PART IX
Remittance of Money through Post Office
43. Remittance of money through the Post
44. Director General may refuse to issue or pay money orders, etc., to certain persons
45. Money orders, etc., to be deemed bank notes
PART X
Offences and Penalties
46. Forging stamps, dies, etc.
47. Removing marks from stamps, etc., with intent to defraud
48. Offences in connection with carriage and delivery of mail
49. Fraudulent, injurious and offensive practices in connection with postal articles and
premises
50. Placing of dangerous or noxious articles and stoppage of mail
51. Tampering with mail
52. Wilfully obstructing or delaying mail
53. Wilfully opening or delaying postal articles
54. Unauthorized use of words "Post Office", "Botswana Mail", etc.
55. Unauthorized entry of premises, obstruction of business, and refusal to comply with
regulations
56. Frauds in connection with money orders, etc.
57. Personating officers of the Post with fraudulent intent
58. False declaration
59. Attempting to commit or procuring commission of offences
60. In criminal proceedings, etc., property in postal articles, money, money orders, etc.,
may be laid in Director General
61. Evidence: acceptance of official marks
PART XI
Miscellaneous
62. Limitation of liability
63. Detention of postal articles
64. Regulations
65. Repeal and savings
Act 22, 1989,
S.I. 2, 1990.
An Act to provide for the establishment of an organization to be known as the Botswana
Postal Services for the provision, development, operation and management of postal
services and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. 
Copyright Government of Botswana
[Date of Commencement: 6th October, 1989]
PART I
Preliminary (ss 1-2)
1. Short title and commencement
This Act may be cited as the Botswana Postal Services Act.
2. Interpretation
In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires-
"financial year" means the year ending on 31st March in each year;
"franking machine" means a machine for the purpose of making impressions on postal
articles to denote payment of postage and includes any meter and any franking or date
stamping die used in connection with postal franking;
"money order" means a money order issued under this Act or by any postal authority
for payment under this Act;
"postage stamp" or "stamp" means any piece of paper or other substance or material
having thereon the stamp mark, or impression of any die, plate or other instrument made or
used under this Act on by any postal authority for the purpose of denoting any postage or other
postal fee;
"postal article" means any letter, post card, reply post-card, letter-card, newspaper,
book, packet, sample packet or pattern or any parcel or other article when in course of
transmission by post;
"postal order" means a postal order issued under this Act or by any postal authority for
payment under this Act;
"postal service" means a service performed and facilities provided in connection with-
(a) the collection, transmission and delivery of postal articles by whatever means of
transportation from one place to another whether within or outside Botswana;
(b) the issue of postage stamps and the use of franking machines; and
(c) the issue or repayment of money orders or postal orders for the remittance of money
through the Botswana Postal Services; and
"senior officer" means any employee of the Botswana Postal Services who holds a
position which is so designated by the Board.
PART II
Establishment of Botswana Postal Services and Board of Management (ss 3-7)
3. Establishment of Botswana Postal Services
(1) There is hereby established a commercial organization of the Government of
Botswana to be known as the Botswana Postal Services, referred to in this Act as the "Post".
(2) Notwithstanding any other law to the contrary, all legal proceedings by or against the
Government of Botswana and related to any commercial activity for or by the Post may be
instituted by or against the Botswana Postal Services in its own name as representing the
Government of Botswana, and the necessary service of process therein may be effected on the
Director General of Botswana Postal Services appointed under section 10 of this Act.
(3) Sections 3 and 6 of the Civil Procedure (Actions by or Against Government or Public
Officers) Act shall not apply to actions by or against the Botswana Postal Services.
4. Establishment of Board
(1) There is hereby established a Board of Management of the Botswana Postal
Services (hereinafter referred to as the Board) which shall have such powers in relation to the
overall management and control of the Post as may be specified in this Act.
(2) The Board shall consist of the following members appointed by the Minister-
(a) the Chairman;
(b) the Director General of the Botswana Postal Services appointed under section 10 who
shall be an ex-officio member; and 
Copyright Government of Botswana
(c) not less than 5 nor more than 7 other persons who in the opinion of the Minister have
knowledge and experience likely to contribute to the successful management of the
Post.
(3) A person shall not be competent to be appointed or to act as a member of the Board
if he-
(a) is a member of the National Assembly;
(b) is an employee of the Post;
(c) has been declared insolvent or bankrupt under any law in any country and has not
been discharged, or made a composition with his creditors and has not paid his debts
in full.
5. Resignation and removal from office
(1) Any member of the Board, other than the Director General, may resign his
membership of the Board by notice in writing to the Minister.
(2) A member of the Board may be removed from membership thereof by the Minister if-
(a) any circumstances arise, which, if he were not a member, would cause him to be
disqualified for appointment as a member of the Board under section 4(2);
(b) he becomes of unsound mind;
(c) he suspends payment of his debts or compounds with his creditors;
(d) he is absent from 3 consecutive meetings of the Board without such reason as appears
to the Minister to be sufficient;
(e) he is sentenced to imprisonment without the option of a fine or is convicted of an
offence involving dishonesty;
(f) is guilty of serious misconduct in relation to his duties as Chairman or member of the
Board; or
(g) in the case of a person possessed of professional qualifications, he is disqualified or
suspended, otherwise than at his own request, from practising his profession in
Botswana, or in any other country, by order of any competent authority made in respect
of him personally.
6. Tenure of office
(1) A member of the Board, other than the Chairman and the Director General, shall hold
office for such period not exceeding 4 years as may be specified in the notice appointing him,
and on the expiration of such period shall be eligible for reappointment:
Provided that in appointing members of the Board the Minister shall so specify such
periods of appointment that the periods of appointment of not more than one-third of the
members shall expire in any one year.
(2) The Chairman of the Board shall hold office as Chairman for a period of 3 years and
on the expiration of such period shall be eligible for reappointment.
(3) The Board shall, once in every year, elect from among its members (other than the
Director General) a Vice-Chairman for a period of one year.
(4) Subject to the provisions of this Act, where any member of the Board is incapacitated
by absence from Botswana or illness or any other sufficient cause, from performing the duties of
his office, the Minister shall appoint another person to hold office in his place until the incapacity
of that person has terminated or until the term of office of such member expires, whichever first
occurs.
7. Payment of members
The Board shall pay to the members thereof such remuneration, fees and allowances for
expenses as may be approved by the Minister.
PART III
Meetings and Proceedings of Board (ss 8-9)
8. Meetings
(1) The Board shall meet for the discharge of its functions at such times and places as 
Copyright Government of Botswana
the Chairman may appoint, so however that the Board shall meet at intervals not exceeding 3
months.
(2) The Chairman, or in his absence the Vice-Chairman, may, and shall on the request in
writing of not less than 2 members of the Board, call an extraordinary meeting of the Board at
such time and place as he may determine.
(3) The Chairman, or in his absence the Vice-Chairman, shall preside at every meeting
of the Board.
(4) In the absence of both the Chairman and the Vice-Chairman, the members present
shall elect one of their number to preside at the meeting.
(5) The quorum at any meeting of the Board shall be not less than one half of the
members of the Board:
Provided that the presence of the Director General shall not count towards the
constitution of the quorum.
(6) All questions proposed at a meeting of the Board shall be determined by a majority of
the members present and voting, and where the votes are equal, the Chairman or the person
presiding shall have a second or casting vote:
Provided that the Director General shall not be entitled to vote unless the Board decides
otherwise in any particular instance.
(7) Any member of the Board who has an interest, or whose spouse has an interest, in
any company or undertaking with which the Board proposes to make a contract, or has an
interest in any contract which the Board proposes to make, shall disclose the nature of his
interest, and shall not vote or take any part in the proceedings of the Board relating to such
contract.
(8) The Board may, and shall if the Minister so directs request the attendance of any
person to act as adviser at a meeting of the Board, and that person while so attending shall
have all the powers of a member except that he shall not vote on any question and his presence
at the meeting shall not count towards the constitution of a quorum.
(9) The validity of any act or proceeding of the Board shall not be affected by any
vacancy among its members or by any defect in the appointment of a member thereof.
(10) The Board may from time to time make standing orders providing for the regulation
of-
(a) meetings of the Board;
(b) the conduct of its business and other operations in furtherance of the purposes of this
Act; and
(c) the duties of its officers, employees and agents.
9. Signification of documents
All documents made by, and all decisions of, the Board may be signified under the hand
of the Chairman of the Board, the Director General or any member or senior officer of the Post
generally or specially authorized in that behalf.
PART IV
Officers, Employees and Agents of the Post (ss 10-11)
10. Appointment of officers and employees
(1) The Post shall have a Director General who shall be appointed by the Minister upon
such terms and conditions as may be determined by the Board.
(2) No person shall be appointed as Director General unless he is qualified by
experience and training, and has demonstrated that he is competent, to manage and operate
the business of the Post.
(3) The Director General shall, subject to such directions on matters of general policy as
may be given by the Board, be charged with the direction of the business of the Post and of its
administration and organization, and the control of the employees of the Post.
(4) The Director General may resign from office by notice in writing addressed to the 
Copyright Government of Botswana
Minister.
(5) The Director General may delegate to any senior officer of the Post the exercise of
any power which he is authorized to exercise under this Act.
(6)(a) The Board shall, on consideration of the recommendations of the Director
General, from time to time determine the staff deemed necessary for the proper discharge of the
functions of the Post and the terms and conditions of employment.
(b) The appointment and dismissal of all persons to or from positions designated by
the Board as held by senior officers shall be made by the Board on consideration of
recommendations by the Director General.
(c) The appointment and dismissal of all other staff shall be made by the Director
General or such senior officer as he may delegate to perform this function.
(7) The Board may-
(a) grant pensions, gratuities or retiring allowances to any officer or employee and may
require such officer or employee to contribute to any pension or contributory scheme;
(b) for the benefit of its officers and employees, establish and make contributions to any
pension or superannuation fund or medical fund; and
(c) from time to time appoint and employ upon such terms and conditions as it may think fit
such agents and contractors as it may deem necessary.
(8) Public officers from Ministries or other Departments may be transferred or seconded
to the Post or may with the consent of their supervisors otherwise give assistance thereto.
(9) Officers and employees of the Post shall, in so far as it is not inconsistent with the
provisions of this Act, be public officers.
(10) Officers and employees of the Post may become members of the appropriate Trade
Union in accordance with the Trade Union legislation in force from time to time.
11. Delegation to committee
The Board may, by resolution, delegate to any committee appointed by it the exercise of
any of the powers which it is authorized by this Act to exercise, generally or in any particular
case.
PART V
Functions, Powers and Duties of the Post (ss 12-16)
12. Functions and powers
(1) The functions of the Post shall be-
(a) to provide, develop, operate and manage postal services in an efficient and cost
effective manner; and
(b) to carry out such other operations as may appear to the Board to be conducive or
incidental to the attainment of all or any of its objectives under this Act or any other law.
(2) The Post shall have all powers necessary or convenient for the performance of its
functions and duties and, without prejudice to the generality thereof, shall have the power to-
(a) acquire and use any kind of property, undertaking, right or privilege and dispose of the
same to the Government, or to any person other than a member, officer or employee of
the Post or any agent or contractor appointed or employed by the Post;
(b) enter into agreements in connection with the operation of postal services;
(c) supply, sell or market air postal services to all persons desiring such services;
(d) enter into such contracts as may be necessary for the performance of its functions and
duties;
(e) construct or cause to be constructed such works, houses, offices and other buildings
and structures as it may deem necessary or expedient for the performance of its
functions and duties;
(f) purchase, take on lease or otherwise acquire or construct or cause to be constructed
such tools, appliances, machinery, plant and equipment as it may deem necessary or
expedient for the performance of its functions and duties; 
Copyright Government of Botswana
(g) sell, exchange, lease, dispose of, turn to account or otherwise deal with any of its
assets or any part thereof, whether movable or immovable, not required for its
purposes:
 Provided that the immovable property of the Post shall not be sold without the
approval in writing of the Minister for the time being responsible for finance;
(h) invest from time to time, in such manner as it may deem fit, such moneys held by it as
may be surplus to its immediate requirements, subject to the approval in writing of the
Minister for the time being responsible for finance;
(i) insure with any company or person against any loss, damage, risk or liability which the
Post may incur;
(j) purchase or sell any materials and stores used in the performance of its functions;
(k) sell, hire or otherwise dispose of any apparatus used in connection with Postal
services; and
(l) carry on any activity which is reasonably requisite or convenient for or in connection
with the discharge of its functions under this Act.
13. Exclusive privilege of the Post
(1) The Post shall have the exclusive privilege of establishing and operating postal
services in Botswana.
(2) Notwithstanding subsection (1) the Minister may, after consultation with the Board, by
notice published in the Gazette, exempt services rendered by any person from the provisions of
subsection (1) for such period as he may determine.
14. Co-operation with authorities
In the discharge of its functions the Post shall co-operate with local and other public
authorities, including department and agencies of the Government, and shall consult with local
authorities in matters of concern to the Post which affect their interest.
15. Research and records
With a view to facilitating present or future research or planning, the Post shall keep full
and accurate records of all of its operations and shall have power to engage in research and to
assist others to engage in research in respect of any matter relating to its functions, and to
publish such records and the results of any such research.
16. Power of Minister to give directions
The Minister may, after consultation with the Board, give to the Board such directions of
a general or specific character as to the exercise and performance of its powers in fulfilling its
functions as are necessary as a matter of policy and as are not inconsistent with this Act or with
the contractual or other legal obligations of the Post, and the Board shall give effect to any such
directions.
PART VI
Finances (ss 17-21)
17. Principles of financial operations
(1) It shall be the duty of the Post to conduct its affairs on sound commercial lines and, in
particular, so carry out its functions under this Act and so prescribe the charges payable in
respect of the provision by the Post of its postal services as to ensure that its revenues are
sufficient to produce on the fair value of its assets a reasonable return.
(2) In determining what constitutes a reasonable return, all pertinent economic and
financial considerations shall be taken into account, which shall include but not be limited to the
need for a net operating income in an amount sufficient-
(a) to meet interest payments on borrowings;
(b) to provide for repayments to be made each year in respect of loans incurred by the
Post to the extent to which such repayments exceed the year's provision for
depreciation charged to revenue account;
(c) to provide a reasonable proportion of the funds needed for expanding the Post's 
Copyright Government of Botswana
activities and improving its services;
(d) to provide reserves for replacement, expansion or other purposes if and to the extent to
which the Board deems it necessary to establish such reserves; and
(e) to make dividend payments to the Government in respect of its equity interest in the
Post if and to the extent deemed appropriate by the Board, after consultation with the
Minister, and the Minister for the time being responsible for finance, and having regard
to the future financial requirements of the Post.
18. Fixing of tariffs
(1) The Board shall, with the approval of the Minister, which approval shall not be
unreasonably withheld, prescribe the tariffs or other charges for which it provides postal
services so as to ensure that it is able to comply with the provisions of section 17.
(2) The Board may prescribe different tariffs, charges or methods of charges for different
classes or categories of service and for different areas or places.
(3) Notwithstanding subsection (1), the Board may, where special circumstances exist
and with the consent of the Minister, which consent shall not be unreasonably withheld, enter
into agreement with any person providing for special tariffs or charges on a commercial basis in
respect of that agreement.
19. Borrowing powers
(1) In order to enable the Post to discharge its functions under this Act and to meet its
obligations it may borrow, on such terms and in such currencies as may be agreed between it
and any lender, such sums as it may require, subject to the approval of the Minister for the time
being responsible for finance.
(2) The Post may charge its assets, undertakings, and revenues with the repayment of
any money borrowed together with interest thereon and may issue debentures, bonds or other
securities in order to secure the repayment of any money borrowed together with interest
thereon and may do all other things necessary in connection with or incidental to such
borrowings as are authorized by this section, subject to the approval of the Minister for the time
being responsible for finance.
20. Vesting of property in the Post
(1) Any properties, assets, rights, debts, liabilities and obligations of the Government and
the benefit and burden of all contracts made by or on behalf of the Government which are part
of or concern or relate to postal services, may with the consent of the Board be transferred to
and vest in the Post as hereinafter provided on terms and conditions agreed to by the Board.
(2) The Minister may from time to time, by notice published in the Gazette, designate for
the purposes of this section properties, assets, rights, debts, liabilities and obligations of the
Government and contracts made by or on behalf of the Government which are part of, concern
or relate to postal services, and as from the date specified in any such designation the
properties, assets, rights, debts, liabilities and obligations and the benefit and burden of the
contracts so designated shall vest in the Post.
(3)(a) For the purposes of this subsection "appropriate date" means, in respect of any
loan agreement made between the Government and any person whereby money was or is to be
borrowed by the Government and used for or in connection with postal services, the date of the
vesting of such loan agreement in the Post by virtue of the foregoing provisions of this section.
(b) The Post shall pay to the Government, in such manner and on such date or dates as
the Minister may, with the concurrence of the Board and the Minister for the time being
responsible for finance, from time to time specify, any amount expended or advanced by the
Government for or in connection with postal services comprising-
 (i) all amounts repaid in respect of capital or interest by the Government to any
person before the appropriate date under any loan agreement to which paragraph
(a) applies;
 (ii) all amounts disbursed or to be disbursed by the Government in repayment of any 
Copyright Government of Botswana
other loan raised or to be raised by the Government, and interest thereon, to the
extent to which such loan has been or will be applied to postal services which,
before the date specified in a designation pursuant to subsection (2), has not been
offset by an amount or amounts credited to the Consolidated Fund for that
purpose;
 (iii) amounts equal to the outstanding debit balance of any advances made by the
Government and all costs incurred by the Government as a result of making such
advances;
 (iv) any other amounts paid or to be paid by the Government which, before the date
specified in a designation pursuant to subsection (2), has not been offset by an
amount or amounts credited to the Consolidated Fund for that purpose.
(4) If, within one month from the date specified by the Minister under subsection (3)(b)
for the payment of any amount payable by the Post to the Government under that subsection,
the Post fails to pay such amount, it shall pay interest thereon as from the date specified as
aforesaid at such rate or rates as the Minister may, with the concurrence of the Minister for the
time being responsible for finance, from time to time determine.
21. Accounts and audit
(1) The Post shall keep proper accounts and other records in relation to its operations,
and shall prepare in respect of each financial year a statement of accounts showing in detail the
assets and liabilities (real and contingent) and income and expenditure of the Post, in a form
which shall conform with the best commercial accounting standards, applicable to the provision
of postal services.
(2) The accounts of the Post in respect of each financial year shall, within 4 months or
such extended time after the end thereof as the Minister may direct, be audited by the
Auditor-General or any auditor appointed by the Auditor-General (hereinafter referred to as
"appointed auditor").
(3) The Auditor-General or any appointed auditor shall report in respect of the accounts
for each financial year, in addition to any other matter on which he deems it pertinent to
comment, whether or not-
(a) he has received all the information and explanations which, to the best of his
knowledge and belief, were necessary for the performance of his duties as auditor;
(b) the accounts and related records of the Post have been properly kept;
(c) the Post has complied with all the financial provisions of this Act with which it is the
duty of the Post to comply; and
(d) the statement of accounts prepared by the Post was prepared on a basis consistent
with that of the proceeding year and represents a true and fair view of the transactions
and financial affairs of the Post.
(4) The report of the Auditor-General or the appointed auditor and a copy of the audited
accounts shall, within 7 days of the completion thereof, be forwarded to the Minister and to the
Board.
(5) The Minister shall, within 30 days of receiving the report and a copy of the audited
accounts, lay such report and accounts before the National Assembly.
PART VII
General (ss 22-28)
22. Annual report
(1) The Board shall, within a period of 6 months after the end of the financial year or
within such longer period as the Minister may approve, submit to the Minister a comprehensive
report on the operations of the Botswana Postal Services during such year together with the
auditor's report and the audited accounts as provided for in section 21, and the Board shall
publish them in such manner as the Minister may specify.
(2) The Minister shall, within 30 days of his receiving the Board's report, lay such report 
Copyright Government of Botswana
before the National Assembly.
23. Compulsory acquisition of land
For the purposes of any written law for the time being in force relating to the compulsory
acquisition of land for public pursposes, the functions and operations of the Post shall be
deemed to be public purposes.
24. Resettlement measures
If the operations of the Post make necessary resettlement of any person dwelling upon
any communally owned land, the terms of such resettlement shall be subject to the agreement
of the Government and of the local authorities of the area concerned.
25. Compensation for loss or damage
(1) In the exercise of its powers under this Act in relation to the execution of works or
interference with property, the Post shall cause as little detriment and inconvenience and do as
little damage as possible, and shall make full compensation to all local and other authorities and
other persons who have sustained loss or damage by reason or in consequence of the exercise
of such powers and, in default of agreement between the parties, the amount and application for
such compensation shall be determined by arbitration in accordance with the provisions of the
Arbitration Act.
(2) For the purpose of such arbitration the parties shall be deemed to be parties to a
submission in which the reference is to two arbitrators.
26. Power to call for information
The Minister may, for purposes associated with the administration of this Act, require the
Board to provide him with estimates of the Post's future revenue and expenditure, and such
other information relating to its activities and operations, including books of accounts, records,
documents and agreements relating to postal services operated by the Post, as he may specify.
27. Power of Board to make bye-laws
The Board may, with the approval of the Minister, make bye-laws for any purpose
connected with its powers, functions and duties under this Act, and may impose penalties for
breach of any such bye-laws.
28. Transitional provisions
(1) Unless the contrary intention is indicated by the Board, every member of the staff of
the former Department of Postal Services shall be deemed to have been duly appointed to an
equivalent post under this Act.
(2) Nothing in this Act shall be taken to effect any alteration in the terms of a contract
subsisting immediately before the commencement of this Act or to authorize the making of any
such alteration without the consent in writing of all parties bound by the contract.
PART VIII
Transmission of Postal Articles (ss 29-42)
29. Registration of postal articles
(1) The sender of any postal article may, upon payment of the prescribed fee in addition
to the ordinary postage, have that article registered and obtain a receipt for it; but no such
registration or receipt shall confer on any person any right to compensation or impose upon any
officer any liability for the loss of any such article or of the contents thereof:
Provided that the Director General may in an appropriate case, in his discretion pay
compensation for the loss of any registered postal article or of the contents thereof.
(2) Any postal article containing coin, bank notes, stamps, precious metals, precious
stones or other articles of a like nature which have an intrinsic or marketable value shall be
registered and if not so registered shall be liable on delivery to a charge equal to double the
amount of any deficiency between the postage paid and the correct charge had the article been
registered at the time of posting. No compensation shall be paid or payable in respect of the
loss of any postal article, required to be registered under this subsection, but which is not so
registered at the time of posting. 
Copyright Government of Botswana
30. When postal articles deemed to be in course of transmission or to be posted or
delivered
For the purposes of this Act-
(a) a postal article shall be deemed to be in course of transmission by post from the time of
its being delivered to a post office to the time of its being delivered to the person to
whom it is addressed;
(b) the placing of a postal article in a pillar box or other receptacle provided or the purpose
by or with the approval of the Post, or the delivery of a postal article to an officer or
other person authorized by the Director General to receive postal articles of that
description, shall be deemed to be delivery to a post office;
(c) the delivery of a postal article at the house or office of the person to whom the article is
addressed or to his servant or agent or other responsible person or at the address
specified on such article shall be deemed to be delivery to the person addressed; and
(d) delivery into a private box or private bag shall be deemed to be personal delivery to the
addressee.
31. Redirection and interception of postal articles
(1) The redirection of any unopened postal article (other than a parcel) from one place to
another may be effected free of charge provided the new address has been fully prepaid, but
registered articles redirected by the public shall be subject in each case to a further fee for
registration.
(2) Any redirected article which appears to the Director General to have been opened or
tampered with shall be treated as if it were posted for the first time and shall be chargeable
accordingly.
(3) Any article arrested or intercepted in transit through the post-
(a) at the request of either the sender or the addressee thereof, shall be liable to an
additional charge equal to the ordinary rate of postage from the place of the original
address to the place of the new address and any article which under the provisions of
this Act may be returned to the sender thereof shall if reposted be liable again to
postage;
(b) for delivery to the sender or addressee at the office in which stoppage is effected, shall
be liable to such special fee as may be prescribed.
(4) Nothing contained in subsection (3) shall require the Director General to arrest or
intercept any postal article.
32. Articles deemed to be posted in contravention of Act
A postal article received in a post office shall be deemed to have been posted in
contravention of this Act if-
(a) the postage stamps thereon have been previously used, obliterated or defaced;
(b) any blasphemous, indecent, obscene, offensive or libellous matter appears on the
outside thereof or any indecent or obscene matter is enclosed therein; or
(c) it is posted or contains anything in fraud of or contrary to the provisions of this Act or
any other law.
33. Articles to be sent by postmasters to Returned Letter Office for disposal
Any postal article which is-
(a) without address or bears an illegible address or is otherwise undeliverable;
(b) refused by the person to whom it is addressed; or
(c) posted or reasonably suspected to have been posted in contravention of this Act or any
other law,
shall be sent to the Returned Letter Office of Botswana and dealt with as may be prescribed:
Provided that any article referred to in paragraph (a) or (b) which bears on the outside
thereof the name and address of the sender may be returned to him.
34. Articles other than letters may be opened for examination 
Copyright Government of Botswana
(1) Any postal article, other than a letter, may be opened for examination in order to
ascertain whether or not that article is entitled to transmission at the rate of postage prepaid
thereon or has been posted in contravention of this Act.
(2) The decision of the Director General as to whether or not any postal article is a letter
or any description of postal article shall be final.
35. Treatment of unclaimed letters in Returned Letter Office
Any postal article originally posted within Botswana which is sent to the Returned Letter
Office in accordance with section 33, or which is undelivered, shall be opened by an officer
authorized by the Director General for that purpose and shall, unless it contains any valuable or
saleable enclosure or has in the opinion of the Director General been posted in contravention of
this Act or with intent to evade payment of the postage properly chargeable thereon, be returned
to the sender thereof if his name and address are known, and may, if the sender refuses to
receive it or if his name and address are not known, be sold or destroyed.
36. Unclaimed articles of value and articles posted in contravention of Act
(1) Any postal article opened under the provisions of this Act which contains any
valuable or saleable enclosure shall be safely kept and a record thereof and of its contents shall
be made and preserved.
(2) The Director General shall, unless any such postal article or the contents thereof
have in his opinion been posted in contravention of this Act or with intent to evade payment of
the postage properly chargeable thereon, cause notice of his possession of that article and of
the contents thereof to be sent to the person to whom it is addressed or, if he cannot be found,
to the sender thereof if he can be found.
(3) The Director General shall, upon application by the person to whom the notice has
been sent, cause such postal article and its contents to be delivered to such person upon
payment of all charges due thereon.
(4) If no application under subsection (3) is made within 3 months after the sending of a
notice under subsection (2), or if the postal article in question or the contents thereof has in the
opinion of the Director General been posted in contravention of this Act or with intent to evade
payment of any charge properly payable thereon, such article and its contents shall (without
affecting the liability to any penalty or punishment to which the sender may be subject), be
destroyed, sold or otherwise disposed of as the Director General may direct.
(5) The proceeds of the sale of any postal article or the contents thereof, as well as any
such contents consisting of money or any order or security for money, shall be paid into and
form part of the postal revenue.
(6) Any such order or security for money shall for the purpose of procuring payment be
deemed to be the property of the Director General.
37. Sender of undelivered article liable for all charges due
(1) The sender of an undelivered postal article shall on demand pay all charges due
thereon, and shall, in the event of his refusal to pay such charges, be guilty of an offence and
liable to a fine of P10,00.
(2) This section shall not be construed as releasing the person to whom a postal article
is originally addressed from liability to pay the charges due thereon if such a postal article is
delivered to him.
38. Delay, return to sender or delivery to other than addressee of article prohibited
Save as expressly provided in this Act, no postal article shall be delayed in transmission
or returned to the sender or be delivered to any person not named in the address thereof except
with the consent in writing of the addressee or on the special authority of the Director General.
39. Undelivered articles of no value and newspapers may be destroyed
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in section 35 or 38 an undelivered
postal article, which appears to be of no appreciable value or importance, and an undelivered
newspaper may, after retention for the period prescribed, be sold, destroyed or otherwise 
Copyright Government of Botswana
disposed of as the Director General may direct.
40. Articles addressed to insolvent person
When the estate of any person has been sequestrated by a competent court in
Botswana, the Director General shall cause all postal articles addressed to such person to be
delivered to the trustee in such insolvent estate or, if no trustee has been appointed, to the
Master of the High Court.
41. Articles addressed to deceased person
Postal articles addressed to a deceased person may be delivered to the executor or
administrator of such deceased person on the production of letters of administration or, pending
production of letters of administration, at the address indicated thereon.
42. Articles addressed to persons conducting lottery or dealing in indecent or obscene
matter
When the Director General is satisfied by any advertisement, letter, circular or other
documentary evidence that any person is conducting or assisting as agent or otherwise in
conducting an illegal lottery, or is dealing in indecent or obscene matter, and is using the
services of the Post for the purpose thereof, the Director General may detain or delay all postal
articles addressed to such person or his agent or representative without the name of any person
appearing thereon, and all such postal articles may be opened and returned to the senders
thereof or otherwise disposed of as the Director General may deem fit.
PART IX
Remittance of Money through Post Office (ss 43-45)
43. Remittance of money through the Post
Any person may remit money through the Post to any other person whether in or outside
Botswana at such rates of commission as may be prescribed and the Director General may
authorize any office in the Post to issue and pay money orders, postal orders or any other
document prescribed for the purpose of remitting money.
44. Director General may refuse to issue or pay money orders, etc, to certain persons
The Director General may refuse to issue or pay a money order, postal order or other
document to a person to whom the provisions of section 42 apply and, where payment of any
such order or other document is refused, such order may, if it was issued in Botswana, be
returned to the person to whom it was originally issued, or otherwise disposed of as the Director
General may deem fit, or, if it was issued outside Botswana, the amount thereof shall be
returned to the postal authority of the country in which it was issued.
45. Money orders, etc., to be deemed bank notes
(1) A money order, postal order or other document issued under section 43 shall be
deemed to be a bank note or any order for the payment of money and a valuable security within
the meaning of any law relating to forgery or theft.
(2) An unissued postal order shall be deemed to be public money.
PART X
Offences and Penalties (ss 46-61)
46. Forging stamps, dies, etc.
Any person who without due authority or lawful excuse, the proof of which shall lie upon
him-
(a) makes, alters, imitates or imports or assists in making, altering, imitating or importing
any postage stamp, date stamp, card, envelope, wrapper cover or any money order,
postal order, postal draft or savings bank warrant or any other warrant or order for the
payment of money through the Post, or acknowledgement of deposit or any form or
paper similar to that used or made under the authority or for the purposes of this Act or
by any postal authority, or uses, issues, offers, exposes for sale, sells, deals in, sends
by post or disposes of or has in his custody or possession any such postage stamp,
date stamp, card, envelope, wrapper, cover, money order, postal order, postal draft, 
Copyright Government of Botswana
savings bank warrant or any other warrant or order, acknowledgement of deposit, form
or paper, knowing it to have been made or altered or to be an imitation contrary to this
section;
(b) engraves or in any manner makes upon any plate or material any stamp, mark, figure
or device in imitation of or resembling any stamp, mark, figure or device used or made
for the purposes of this Act or by any postal authority, or sells, disposes of, purchases,
receives or has in his custody or possession any plate or material so engraved or
made;
(c) makes or assists in making or has in his custody or possession any mould, frame or
other instrument having thereon any word, letter, figure, mark, line or device peculiar to
paper provided, used or made for any postage stamp or for any other purpose of this
Act or by any personal authority;
(d) makes or assists in making or has in his custody or possession any paper in the
substance of which appear any word, letter, figure, mark, line or device peculiar to
paper provided, used or made for any postage stamp or for any other purpose of this
Act or by any postal authority, or makes, purchases, sells, disposes of or receives or
has in his custody or possession any paper provided or made for the purposes of being
used for any postage stamp or for any other purposes of this Act or by any postal
authority before the same has been issued for public use;
(e) makes use of any stamp, dye, plate or paper engraved or made for the purposes of this
Act or by any postal authority, or sells, disposes of, purchases, receives or has in his
custody or possession any paper or material whatever bearing an impression or mark
of any such stamp, dye, plate or paper; or
(f) makes on any envelope, wrapper, card, form or paper any mark in imitation of or
similar to or purporting to be any official stamp or mark used for the purposes of this
Act or by any postal authority, or any word, letter, device or mark which signifies or
implies or may reasonbly be regarded as signifying or implying that any article bearing
such word, letter, device or mark has been or is entitled to be sent through the post,
shall be guilty of an offence and shall be liable to a fine of P2 000,00 and to imprisonment for 5
years, and any stamp, dye, plate, paper, instrument or other material found in the possession of
such person in contravention of this section shall be seized and forfeited to the State.
47. Removing marks from stamps, etc., with intent to defraud
(1) Any person who, with intent to defraud-
(a) removes from an article sent by Post or from a document used for the purposes of this
Act any stamp which has been affixed thereon, or wilfully removes, either actually or
apparently, from any stamp which has been previously used, any mark or impression
which has been made thereon at any post office, or knowingly utters, issues or uses
any stamp or any part thereof which has been so removed or from which any such
mark or impression has been removed;
(b) erases, cuts, scrapes, defaces, obliterates or otherwise discharges or removes from,
either actually or apparently, or in any manner adds to or alters any mark or impression
upon, a money order, postal order, postal draft, savings bank warrant, or other order or
warrant, or acknowledgement of deposit, paper or other material provided, used or
made for the purposes of this Act or by any postal authority;
(c) makes, does or practises or is concerned in any other act, contrivance or device for
which no specific penalty is provided, or attempts unlawfully to evade payment of any
of the rates, fees or duties payable under this Act,
shall be guilty of an offence and shall be liable to a fine of P200,00 and to imprisonment for 6
months.
(2) For the purposes of this Part the sender of a postal article shall, unless the contrary
is proved, be deemed to be the person by whom any postage stamp upon that article was 
Copyright Government of Botswana
affixed.
(3) In any proceedings in respect of an offence under this section the burden or proving
an absence of intent to defraud shall lie on the accused.
48. Offence in connection with carriage and delivery of mail
Any person authorised to receive or in any way to handle mail who-
(a) negligently loses or wilfully detains, delays, misdelivers or omits to dispatch any mail
(whether or not the same is afterwards recovered or delivered) or communicates or
divulges the contents of any postal article;
(b) while in charge of any mail, leaves it, or suffers any person, not being the guard or
person employed for that purpose, to travel in the place appointed for the guard in or
upon any conveyance carrying the mail, or to travel in or upon any such conveyance
not authorized to carry passengers or upon any horse or other animal conveying that
mail;
(c) is guilty of carelessness, negligence or any misconduct where the safety of any mail is
endangered;
(d) while in charge of any mail is intoxicated or loiters or wilfully misspends or loses time
so as to retard the arrival of the mail at its proper destination within the time fixed for its
arrival, or does not use due care and diligence to safely convey the mail at the due rate
of speed;
(e) gives false information of any assault or attempt at robbery upon him; or
(f) without due authority, collects, receives, conveys or delivers any postal article
otherwise than in the ordinary course of post,
shall be guilty of an offence and shall be liable to a fine of P200,00 and to imprisonment for 6
months.
49. Fraudulent, injurious and offensive practices in connection with postal articles and
premises
(1) Any person who-
(a) with intent to defraud, puts into any post office anything purporting to be a postal article
within the exemptions specified in this Act, or any postal article purporting to belong to
a class, in respect of which a lower rate of postage or no postage is chargeable, or
insufficiently stamped which if sent alone would be liable to postage;
(b) with intent to defraud, puts into any post office any article in or upon or with which there
is any communication, intelligence, character, figure, number, mark, matter or thing not
allowed by this Act or by any other law, or wilfully subscribes on the outside of any
posted article or otherwise a false statement of the contents thereof;
(c) puts into any post office any article in which or with which or upon which there is any
indecent or obscene matter, or anything of a profane, defamatory or grossly offensive
character;
(d) without due authority, the proof of which shall lie upon him, places or paints anything
whatsoever upon, or wilfully injures, disfigures or tampers with any post office or any
card, notice or other property of or used by or on behalf of the post, or commits a
nuisance on or against any post office or against or upon such card, notice or other
property;
(e) detains, secretes or keeps any mail or postal article which ought to have been
delivered to another person or which has been found by himself or by any other
person; or
(f) by false representation induces any officer to deliver to him or to any other person any
postal article not addressed to or intended for either of them,
shall be guilty of an offence and shall be liable to a fine of P200,00 and to imprisonment for 6
months, without prejudice to any right the Director General may have of proceeding civilly
against any person convicted under paragraph (d) for compensation for such damage as may 
Copyright Government of Botswana
have been caused by him.
(2) In any proceedings in respect of any offence under paragraph (1)(a) or (b) the burden
of proving an absence of intent to drafraud shall lie on the accused.
50. Placing of dangerous or noxious articles and stoppage of mail
(1) Any person who-
(a) sends in or with any postal article or puts into or against any post office any fire, match
or light or any explosive, dangerous, filthy, noxious or deleterious matter or thing or any
matter or thing which is likely to injure or damage any post office, person or mail;
(b) steals any mail or steals from any mail or post office or from the possession or custody
of any officer, or for any purpose embezzles or fraudulently secretes or destroys any
postal article or any of the contents thereof;
(c) receives any mail or postal article or any of the contents thereof knowing the same to
have been stolen, embezzled or fraudulently secreted or to have been sent or intended
to be sent by post; or
(d) stops any mail with intent to rob or search such mail, shall be guilty of an offence and
shall be liable to a fine of P2 000,00 and to imprisonment for 7 years.
(2) The Board may make bye-laws exempting from the provisions of this section noxious
or deleterious matter sent in the interests of public health or justice in accordance with such
requirements as it may prescribe.
51. Tampering with mail
Any officer who otherwise than in pursuance of his duty opens or tampers with or wilfully
destroys, makes away with or secretes or suffers to be opened or tampered with, destroyed,
made away with or secreted any mail or postal article, and any person who opens or tampers
with or wilfully destroys, makes away with or secretes any mail shall be guilty of an offence and
shall be liable to a fine of P2 000,00 and to imprisonment for 5 years.
52. Wilfully obstructing or delaying mail
Any person who wilfully interferes with the conveyance of any mail or through whose act
or neglect the conveyance of any mail is interfered with shall be guilty of an offence and shall be
liable to a fine of P200,00 and to imprisonment for 6 months.
53. Wilfully opening or delaying postal articles
(1) Any person, not being an officer, who wilfully opens any postal article which he
knows ought to have been delivered to another person, or knowingly does any act or thing
whereby the due delivery of that article to such other person is prevented, obstructed or
delayed, shall be guilty of an offence and shall be liable to a fine of P200,00 and to
imprisonment for 6 months.
(2) Nothing in this section contained shall apply to any person who does any act to which
this section applies where that person is the parent or in the position of parent or guardian of the
addressee and the addressee is a minor under 16 years of age or a ward.
(3) No prosecution under this section shall be instituted except by the direction or with
the consent of the Director General.
54. Unauthorized use of words "Post Office", "Botswana Mail", etc.
Any person who, without the authority of the Director General, the proof of which shall lie
upon him-
(a) places or maintains or suffers to be placed or maintained, or to remain in, on or near
any place belonging to him or under his control the word "Post Office" or any other
word or mark which may imply or may give reasonable cause for believing that place to
be a post office; or
(a) places or maintains or permits to be placed or maintained or to remain on any vehicle
or vessel the words "Botswana Mail" or any other word or mark which may imply or
may give reasonable cause for believing that such vehicle or vessel is used for the
conveyance of mail, 
Copyright Government of Botswana
shall be guilty of an offence and shall be liable be to a fine of P200,00 and to imprisonment for 6
months.
55. Unauthorized entry of premises, obstruction of business, and refusal to comply
with regulations
(1) Any person, not being an officer, who without the express permission of the Director
General or of an officer having authority to give permission, enters any part of a post office in
which is carried on any of the operations in respect of which an oath of secrecy is required to be
taken by officers, or whilst in any post office, wilfully obstructs the course of business of the post
or behaves in a disorderly manner or who wilfully obstructs, hinders or delays any officer in the
execution of his duty, or who fails to comply with any regulations which have been issued, or
by-laws to secure the comfort and convenience of the public or the safety of the premises, and
which state that failure to comply therewith shall be an offence, shall be guilty of an offence and
shall be liable to a fine of P200,00 and to imprisonment for 6 months.
(2) An officer may require any person committing an offence under this section to leave
the post office in question immediately, and any such person who fails to comply with such a
requirement may be removed by any officer, and any member of the police force shall on
demand by an officer remove or assist in removing any such person.
56. Frauds in connection with money orders, etc.
Any person who with fraudulent intent issues, re-issues, utters or presents to any person
or at any post office any money order, postal order, savings bank warrant or other warrant,
order or document for the remittance, payment, collection or deposit of money through or with
the Post, or transmits through the Post or otherwise any letter or other communication
concerning any money order, postal order, savings bank warrant or other warrant, order or
document for the remittance, payment, collection or deposit of money through or with the Post,
shall be guilty of an offence and on conviction there of shall be liable to a fine of P2 000,00 and
to imprisonment for 5 years, and in any proceedings in respect of any offence under this section
the burden of proving an absence of fraudulent intent shall lie on the accused.
57. Personating officers of the Post with fraudulent intent
Any person who, with fraudulent intent, personates or represents himself to be an officer
of the Post shall be guilty of an offence and shall be liable to a fine of P800,00 and to
imprisonment for 2 years.
58. False declaration
Any person who in any declaration prescribed by this Act makes a false statement
knowing the same to be false shall be guilty of an offence and shall be liable to a fine of
P400,00 and to imprisonment for 6 months.
59. Attempting to commit or procuring commission of offences
Any person who attempts to commit any offence under this Act, or solicits, or authorizes
or endeavours to employ, cause, procure, aid, abet, incite or counsel any other person to do
anything the doing whereof is an offence under this Act, shall be guilty of an offence and liable
to the same punishment as if he actually commited the offence.
60. In criminal proceedings, etc, property in postal articles, money, money orders, etc,
may be laid in Director-General
In any prosecution for any crime or any offence committed in respect of the Post or of
any mail or any property, moneys, money order, postal order or other document authorized to
be used for the purpose of remitting, paying, collecting or depositing money through or with the
Post, or with respect to any act, deed, matter or thing which has been done or committed with
any malicious, injurious or fraudulent intent relating to or concerning the Post or any such mail,
property, moneys, money order, postal order or other document, it shall be sufficient-
(a) to allege that any such mail, property, moneys, money order, postal order or other
document belongs to or is in the lawful possession of the Director General and to put
the same in evidence, and it shall not be necessary to allege or prove the same to be 
Copyright Government of Botswana
any value;
(b) to allege that any such act, deed, matter or thing was done or committed with intent to
injure or defraud the Director General without setting forth his or any other name,
addition or description whatsoever; and
(c) if the offender be an officer, to allege that the offender was an officer of the Post at the
time of the committing of the offence without stating the nature or particulars of his
employment.
61. Evidence: acceptance of official marks
In any proceedings for the recovery of any sum payable under this Act in respect of a
postal article-
(a) the official stamp or mark thereupon denoting the sum due shall be prima facie
evidence of the liability of that postal article to the charge specified thereon; and
(b) the production of any such postal article having thereon a post office stamp or mark
denoting that the article has been refused or that the person to whom the same is
addressed is dead or could not be found shall be prima facie evidence of the fact
denoted.
PART XI
Miscellaneous (ss 62-65)
62. Limitation of liability
(1) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, no liability shall rest on any member of the
Board or the Director General or any officer or employee of the Post by reason of any error,
default, delay, omission, damage, destruction, non-delivery or loss in respect of any postal
article unless it is established that it was due to the negligence or malfeasance of the said
member, officer or employee.
(2) The bona fide payment of any sum of money under the provisions of this Act shall, to
whomever made, discharge the Post from all liability in respect of such payment.
(3) If any person by fraudulent means obtains payment of any sum credited to a
depositor's savings bank account, no liability shall rest on the Post, but the Director General
may at his absolute discretion make good to the depositor any loss sustained or any part
thereof.
63. Detention of postal articles
(1) Any postal article which is reasonably suspected of containing anything which will
afford evidence of the commission of a criminal offence or reasonably suspected of being sent
in order to further the commission of a criminal offence or to enable the detection of a criminal
offence to be concealed shall, on the written request of a police officer of or above rank of
Senior Inspector, be detained by the officer in charge of any post office in which it is or through
which it passes and the Director General shall, if authorized thereto by such police officer,
cause such postal article to be handed over to the said police officer.
(2) On the occurrence of a public emergency or in the interests of public safety or
tranquility, the President may by order in writing addressed to the Director General direct that
any postal article or class or description of postal article in the course of transmission by post
within Botswana be intercepted or detained or be delivered to any officer mentioned in the order
or disposed of in any other manner.
(3) A certificate signed by the President shall be conclusive proof of the existence of a
public emergency or that any act done under subsection (2) was in the interests of public safety
or tranquility.
64. Regulations
The Minister may, after consultation with the Board, make regulations generally for
carrying into effect the provisions of this Act and prescribing anything that under this Act
requires to be prescribed.
65. Repeal and savings 
Copyright Government of Botswana
(1) The Post Office Act, 1980 is hereby repealed.
(2) Notwithstanding the repeal of the Post Office Act, 1980 any statutory instruments
made or any licences issued and in force immediately prior to the commencement of this Act
shall, in so far as they are not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, and until they are
revoked or amended, continue in force as if made or issued under the corresponding provisions
of this Act.
DISCLAIMER
Copyright (c) Botswana Government
The data on this CD-ROM is copyright under the Berne Convention.
Please note that you may be required, in terms of copyright or other laws, to obtain permission
before reproducing any part of this database. Permission to reproduce the contents of this
database may be sought from the Attorney-General Government Enclave Gaborone - Private
Bag 009 Gaborone Botswana.
Disclaimer
Blackhall Publishing hereby disclaims any and all guarantees and warranties on the software
described herein or on the documentation of this software, and specifically disclaims any implied
warranties of the merchantability or fitness of the software or documentation for any particular
purpose. This software and manual are sold on an 'as is' basis; any user of this software or
manual uses it at his or her own risk.
Further, Blackhall Publishing reserves the right to revise this publication and to make changes
from time to time in the software and in the content of this publication without obligation of
Blackhall Publishing to notify any person of such revision or changes. No guarantee is made
that further versions of the software or manual will be compatible with any other versions.
Further, although every care is taken to ensure the accuracy of this publication and disc,
supplements, updates and replacement material, the authors, editors, publishers and printers do
not accept any responsibility for any act, omission, loss, damage or the consequences thereof
occasioned by the reliance by any person upon the contents hereof. 