LAW NUMBER 4 of 1994*
PROMULGATING
THE ENVIRONMENT LAW
and its
EXECUTIVE REGULATION
EGYPT
* In case of difference of interpretation, the Arabic text will prevail
LAW NUMBER 4 of 1994
PROMULGATING
THE ENVIRONMENT LAW
PRESIDENTIAL DECREE
EGYPT 
LAW NUMBER 4 OF 1994
PROMULGATING THE ENVIRONMENT LAW
In the name of the People
The President of the Republic
The People's Assembly has ratified the following law which we have
sanctioned and promulgated :
ARTICLE (1)
WITHOUT PREJUDICE TO THE RULES AND PROVISIONS SET FORTH IN
SPECIAL LAWS, THE PROVISIONS OF THE ATTACHED LAW SHALL APPLY
IN RESPECT OF THE ENVIRONMENT.
ESTABLISHMENTS EXISTING AT THE TIME OF THE ENACTMENT OF THIS
LAW ARE HELD TO ADJUST THEIR STATUS IN LINE WITH ITS
PROVISIONS WITHIN THREE YEARS FROM THE DATE OF PUBLICATION
OF ITS EXECUTIVE REGULATIONS, WITHOUT PREJUDICE TO THE
APPLICATION OF THE PROVISIONS OF LAW 48/1982 CONCERNING THE
PROTECTION OF THE RIVER NILE AND WATERWAYS FROM POLLUTION.
THE CABINET MAY, ON THE BASIS OF A PROPOSAL BY THE MINISTER IN
CHARGE OF ENVIRONMENTAL AFFAIRS, EXTEND THIS GRACE PERIOD
FOR NO MORE THAN TWO YEARS, IF NECESSARY AND IF THE CABINET
IS SATISFIED THAT SERIOUS PROCEDURES HAVE BEEN TAKEN TO PUT
PROVISIONS OF THE ATTACHED LAW INTO FORCE .
ARTICLE (2)
THE PRIME MINISTER SHALL, ON THE BASIS OF A PROPOSAL BY THE
MINISTER IN CHARGE OF ENVIRONMENTAL AFFAIRS AFTER
CONSULTING THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS OF THE ENVIRONMENTAL
AFFAIRS AGENCY(1)
,ISSUE THE EXECUTIVE REGULATIONS OF THE
ATTACHED LAW WITHIN SIX MONTHS FROM THE DATE ON WHICH IT
COMES INTO FORCE.
THE MINISTERS SHALL, EACH IN HIS RESPECTIVE AREA OF
COMPETENCE, ISSUE THE RATES AND PERCENTAGES REQUIRED TO
IMPLEMENT THE PROVISIONS OF PART II OF THE ATTACHED LAW,
WITHOUT PREJUDICE TO THE PROVISIONS OF ARTICLE (5), WITHIN THE
PERIOD MENTIONED IN THE PREVIOUS PARAGRAPH.

(1) SHALL BE ABBREVIATED AS EEAA. 
ARTICLE (3)
LAW 72 OF 1968 CONCERNING THE PREVENTION OF POLLUTION OF
SEA WATER BY OIL IS HEREBY REPEALED, AS ARE ALL OTHER
PROVISIONS RUNNING COUNTER TO THE PROVISIONS OF THE
ATTACHED LAW.
ARTICLE (4)
THIS LAW SHALL BE PUBLISHED IN THE OFFICIAL GAZETTE AND SHALL
COME INTO FORCE ON THE DAY FOLLOWING THE DATE OF ITS
PUBLICATION.
• THIS LAW SHALL BE STAMPED WITH THE SEAL OF STATE AND
ENFORCED AS A LAW OF THE STATE.
• ISSUED AT THE PRESIDENCY OF THE REPUBLIC ON 15 SHAABAN
HEJIRA YEAR 1414 (CORRESPONDING TO 27 JANUARY, 1994).
Signed by
"HOSNY MOBARAK"
LAW NUMBER 4 of 1994
PROMULGATING
THE ENVIRONMENT LAW
EGYPT
Table of Contents
PRELIMINARY PART
CHAPTER ONE: General Provisions (ARTICLE1) .................................. 3
CHAPTER TWO: Environmental Affairs Agency (ARTICLES 2 to 13) ...... 9
CHAPTER THREE: Environmental Protection Fund (ARTICLES 14 to 16) .. 14
CHAPTER FOUR: Incentives (ARTICLES 17to 18) .................................... 15
PART ONE: PROTECTION OF LAND ENVIRONMENT FROM
 POLLUTION
CHAPTER ONE: Development and Environment (ARTICLES 19 to 28) . 15
CHAPTER TWO: Hazardous Material and Waste (ARTICLES 29 to 33) ..

18
PART TWO: PROTECTION OF AIR ENVIRONMENT FROM
 POLLUTION (ARTICLES 34 to 47) ............................

19
PART THREE: PROTECTION OF WATER ENVIRONMENT FROM
 POLLUTION
 CHAPTER ONE: POLLUTION FROM SHIPS (ARTICLES 48 to 68) ....... 22
SECTION ONE: Oil Pollution (ARTICLES 48 to 59).................................... 22
SECTION TWO: Pollution By Harmful Substances (ARTICLES 60 to 65) 26
SECTION THREE: Pollution from Sewage and Garbage
(ARTICLES 66 to 68) ....................................................
27
CHAPTER TWO: POLLUTION FROM LAND BASED SOURCES
(ARTICLES 69 to 75).....................................................
28
CHAPTER THREE: INTERNATIONAL CERTIFICATES
(ARTICLES 76 to 77).....................................................
29
CHAPTER FOUR: ADMINISTRATIVE AND JUDICIAL PROCEDURES
(ARTICLES 78 to 83) .......................................................... 30
PART FOUR: PENALTIES (ARTICLES 84 to 101).................................................. 32
FINAL PROVISIONS (ARTICLES 102 to 104) ................................................ 37 
PRELIMINARY PART
CHAPTER ONE
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Article 1:
In the application of the provisions of this Law, the following words and
expressions shall have the meanings hereby assigned to them:
1. Environment:
The biosphere which encompasses living organisms together with the
substances it contains and the air, water and soil that surround it, as well
as the establishments set up by man.
2. Air:
The mixture of gases constituting air in its known percentages and
natural properties, and in the provisions of this Law, it is the ambient air,
air within the work places, and air in closed or semi-closed public places.
3. The Convention:
The International Convention for the Prevention of Marine Pollution from
Ships (1973-1978), and international conventions, to which the Arab
Republic of Egypt adheres, in the area of the protection of the marine
environment from pollution and compensation for pollution accidents.
4. Public Place:
A place equipped to receive people or a specific category of people for
any purpose.
5. Closed Public Place:
A public place which is in the form of an integrated building that receives
no incoming air except from designated inlets. Vehicles for public
transport are considered closed public places.
6. Semi-closed Public Place:
A public place which is in the form of a non-integrated building with direct
access to the ambient air and which cannot be completely closed.
7. Environmental Pollution:
Any change in environmental properties which may result directly or
indirectly in harming living organisms or establishments or in affecting the
ability of people to lead a normal life.
8. Environmental Degradation:
Effect on the environment that reduces its value, or changes its nature,
depletes its resources or harms living organisms or monuments.
9. Environmental Protection:
Protecting and promoting the components of the environment and
preventing or reducing their degradation or pollution. These components
encompass air, seas, internal waters, including the river Nile, lakes and
subterranean water, land, natural protectorates, and other natural
resources.
10. Air Pollution:
Any change in the properties or specifications of the natural air which
causes hazards to human health or to the environment, whether resulting
from natural factors or human activities, including noise.
11. Rapid Transport Vehicles:
Motor cars, tractors, motorcycles and other machines designed for use
on public roads.
12. Water Pollution:
The introduction of any substance or energy into the water environment,
whether intentionally or unintentionally, directly or indirectly, which
causes damage to living or non-living resources, poses a threat to
human health or hinders water activities, fishing and tourist activities or
impairs the quality of sea water so as to render it unfit for use, diminish
the enjoyment thereof or alter its properties.
13. Polluting Substances and Factors:
Any solid, liquid or gaseous substances, noise, radiation, heat, or
vibrations arising from acts of man that lead directly or indirectly to
environmental pollution or degradation. 
14. Water Polluting Substances:
Any substance whose discharge into the water environment, intentionally
or unintentionally, leads to a change in its properties, or contributes to
such change directly or indirectly to an extent that can harm man, natural
resources, sea water or marine tourist areas, or which interferes with
other legitimate uses of the sea. These substances include:
A- Oil or oily mixtures.
B- Harmful and dangerous wastes as determined in the international
conventions to which the Arab Republic of Egypt adheres.
C- Any other substance (solid, liquid or gaseous) as determined in
the executive regulations of this law.
D- Untreated industrial waste or effluents from industrial
establishments.
E- Toxic military containers.
F- Substances listed in the Convention and its annexes.
15. Oil:
Crude oil and its products in all forms, including any kind of liquid
hydrocarbons, lubricating oil, fuel oil, refined oil, furnace oil, tar and other
petroleum derivatives or waste.
16. Oily Mixtures:
Any mixture containing oil in a ratio of more than 15: 1,000,000.
17. Unclean Balancing Water (Unclean Ballast Water):
Water in ship-borne tanks if its oil content is greater than 15:1,000,000.
18. Hazardous Substances:
Substances having dangerous properties which are hazardous to human
health, or which adversely affect the environment, such as contagious,
toxic, explosive or flammable substances or those with ionizing radiation.
19. Hazardous Waste:
Waste of activities and processes or its ashes which retain the properties
of hazardous substances and have no subsequent original or alternative
uses, like clinical waste from medical treatments or the waste resulting 
from the manufacture of any pharmaceutical products, drugs, organic
solvents, printing fluid, dyes and painting materials.
20. Substance Handling:
Anything that leads to the displacement of substances for the purpose of
assembling, transporting, storing, treating, or using them.
21. Waste Management:
Collecting, transporting, recycling and disposing of waste.
22. Waste Disposal:
Processes which do not extract or recycle waste such as composting,
deep subterranean injection, discharge to surface water, biological
treatment, physio-chemical treatment, permanent storage or incineration.
23. Waste Recycling:
Processes which allow the extraction or recycling of waste, such as using
it as fuel, or extracting metals and organic materials or soil treatment or
oil re-refining.
24. Liquid Substances Harmful to the Water Environment:
The substances listed in the International Convention of 1973/1978.
25. Reception Facilities:
Installations, equipment and basins designed to receive, filter, treat and
dispose of contaminated substances or ballast water, as well as
installations provided by companies working in the field of shipping and
unloading petroleum products; or other administrative agencies
supervising ports and waterways.
26. Discharge:
Any leakage, efflusion, emission, draining or disposal of any kind of
pollutants into the waters of the territorial sea, the exclusive economic
zone, the sea, the river Nile and the waterways, taking into consideration
the levels determined for certain substances in the executive regulations.
27. Dumping:
A- Any deliberate disposal of polluting substances or waste from ships,
planes, platforms or other industrial establishments and land-based
sources into the territorial sea, the exclusive economic zone or the
sea. 
B- Any deliberate dumping by ships or industrial or other establishments
into the territorial sea, the exclusive economic zone or the sea.
28. Compensation:
Means compensation for the damage resulting from pollution accidents in
accordance with the application of the provisions of the Civil Code and
the provisions of the International Convention on Civil Liability to which
the Arab Republic of Egypt adheres or to which it will adhere in future,
including the International Convention on Civil Liability for Damage
Caused by Oil Pollution Accidents signed in Brussels in 1969, or any
other pollution accidents mentioned in the executive regulations of this
Law.
29. Means of Oil Transport:
Every pipeline used in transporting oil and any other equipment used in
loading, unloading or transporting oil, as well as pumps or other
equipment required for the use of these pipes.
30. Ship:
Any floating marine vessel of any type, vessels which move over
hydrofoil cushions or underwater establishments. Also, any fixed or
mobile establishment constructed along the coasts or on surface water
for the purpose of conducting commercial, industrial, touristic or scientific
activities.
31. War Ship:
Any ship that belongs to the armed forces of a state, carrying its distinct
external insignia, under the command of an officer officially appointed by
the government of such state and operated by a crew governed by the
rules of military discipline of that state.
32. Government Ship:
A ship owned by the state and operated or used for governmental and
non-commercial purposes.
33. Harmful Materials Carrier:
A ship constructed originally or redesigned for the purpose of carrying
cargoes of harmful liquid substances in bulk, including oil tankers when
fully or partially loaded with harmful liquid substances not packed in
accordance with the provisions stated in Chapter One, Part Three of this
Law. 
34. Establishment:
Establishment means the following:
- Industrial establishments subject to the provisions of Law No. 21 of 1958
and Law No. 55 of 1977.
- Tourist establishments subject to the provisions of Law No. 1 of 1973
and Law No. 1 of 1992.
- Establishments used for electrical power generation and production
which are under the provisions of laws Nos. 145/1948, 63/1974, 12/1976,
13/1976, 27/1976, and 103/1986.
- Mines, quarries and establishments operating in the field of oil
exploration, drilling, transportation and usage which are subject to the
provisions of laws Nos. 66/1953, 86/1956, 61/1958 and 4/1988.
- All infrastructure projects.
- Any other establishment, activity or project which may have a noticeable
impact on the environment . These shall be determined by a decision
issued by the Environmental Affairs Agency in agreement with the
competent administrative authority.
35. Environmental Monitoring Networks:
Agencies which undertake, within their spheres of competence and
through their stations and work units, to monitor the components and
pollutants of the environment and relay their results and data to the
competent authorities periodically.
36. Environmental Impact Assessment:
Studying and analyzing the environmental feasibility of proposed
projects, whose construction or activities might affect the safety of the
environment in order to protect it.
37. Environmental Disaster:
An accident resulting from natural factors or human action which causes
severe damage to the environment and requires resources beyond the
local means. 
38. The competent Administrative Agency Concerned with the
Protection of the Water Environment:
Any of the following agencies, each within its field of competence:
A- The Environmental Affairs Agency (EEAA)
B- The Department of Ports and Lighthouses.
C- The Suez Canal Authority.
D- Port Authorities in ARE.
E- The General Egyptian Organization for the Protection of the
Coast.
F- Egyptian General Petroleum Corporation. (EGPC).
 G- General Department of Surface Water Police.
H- Tourism Development Authority.
I- Other agencies designated by a Prime Ministerial Decree.
CHAPTER TWO
THE ENVIRONMENTAL AFFAIRS AGENCY
Article 2:
An agency for the protection and promotion of the environment shall be
established within the cabinet premier ship under the name the "Environmental
Affairs Agency". The Agency shall have a public juridical personality and shall
be affiliated to the competent Minister for Environmental Affairs. It shall have an
independent budget and its head office shall be located in Cairo. The Minister
for Environmental Affairs may establish branches for the Agency in the
governorates by ministerial decree, priority to be given to industrial areas.
Article 3:
The chairman of the Agency shall be appointed on the basis of the nomination
of the Minister for Environmental Affairs and the proposal of the Prime Minister.
His appointment shall be effected by a presidential decree which shall include
his financial remuneration
Article 4:
The Environmental Affairs Agency shall replace the agency established by
Presidential Decree 631 of 1982 in all its rights and obligations, and the
employees of the said agency shall be transferred with their grades and
seniority to the Environmental Affairs Agency. 
Article 5:
The Agency shall formulate the general policy and lay down the necessary
plans for the protection and promotion of the environment and follow up the
implementation of such plans in coordination with the competent administrative
authorities. The Agency shall have the authority to implement some pilot
projects.
The Agency shall be the national authority responsible for strengthening
environmental relations between the ARE and other countries and regional and
international organizations. The Agency shall recommend taking the necessary
legal procedures to adhere to regional and international conventions related to
the environment and prepare the necessary draft laws and decrees required for
the implementation of such conventions.
For the fulfillment of its objects, the Agency may:
- Prepare draft laws and decrees related to the fulfillment of its objects and
express its opinion on proposed legislation related to the protection of the
environment.
- Prepare studies on the state of the environment, formulate the national
plan with the projects included for the protection of the environment,
prepare the estimated budgets for each as well as environmental maps
of urban areas and areas to be developed and lay down the criteria to be
observed when planning and developing new areas as well as the criteria
targeted for old areas.
- Lay down the criteria and conditions which owners of projects and
establishments must observe before the start of construction and during
the operation of these projects.
- Draw up a comprehensive list of national institutions and organizations
as well as of qualified individuals who could contribute in the preparation
and execution of environmental protection programmes and could be
made use of in preparing and implementing the projects and studies
undertaken by the Agency.
- Conduct field follow-up of compliance with the criteria and conditions that
are binding to agencies and establishments and take the procedures
prescribed by law against those who violate such criteria and conditions.
- Lay down and follow up the rates and percentages necessary to ensure
that permissible levels of pollutants are not exceeded.
- Gather national and international information on the environmental
situation and the changes affecting it on a periodical basis in cooperation
with the information centres of other agencies, publish such information
and evaluate and utilize it in environmental management and planning. 
- Lay down the principles and procedures for assessing the environmental
effects of projects.
- Prepare an environmental contingency plan in the manner stated in
article 25 of this Law and coordinate with the competent bodies in the
preparation of programmes to face environmental disasters.
- Lay down a plan for environmental training and supervise its
implementation.
- Participate in the preparation and implementation of the national
programme for environmental monitoring and make use of the data
provided thereby.
- Compile and publish periodic reports on the main environmental
indicators.
- Prepare programmes for the environmental education of the public and
assist in their implementation.
- Coordinate with other competent authorities in connection with regulating
and setting safety standards for the conveyance of hazardous materials.
- Administer and supervise natural protectorates.
- Prepare the draft budgets required for the protection and promotion of
the environment.
- Follow up the implementation of international and regional conventions
related to the environment.
- Propose economic mechanisms to encourage different activities and
procedures for the prevention of pollution.
- Implement pilot projects for the preservation of natural resources and the
protection of the environment from pollution.
- Coordinate with the Ministry for International Cooperation to ensure that
projects funded by donor organizations and countries are in line with
environmental safety considerations.
- Participate in laying down a plan to protect the country from leakages of
hazardous substances and waste causing environmental pollution.
- Participate in the preparation of an integrated national plan for the
administration of coastal areas abutting on the Mediterranean Sea and
the Red Sea in coordination with the authorities and ministries
concerned.
- Participate with the Ministry of Education in the preparation of training
programmes for the protection of the environment within the scope of the
various curricula in the basic education stage.
- Prepare an annual report on the environmental situation to be submitted
to the President of the Republic and the Cabinet, a copy of which shall be
deposited at the People's Assembly.
Article 6:
The Board of Directors of the Agency shall be chaired by the Minister in charge
of Environmental Affairs and composed of the following members:
- The CEO of the Agency, who shall be the deputy chairman of the Board.
- A representative from each of six ministries selected by the Prime
Minister from the ministries concerned with the environment, provided the
representative of each ministry shall be a high-ranking official selected by
the competent minister.
- Two experts in the field of environmental affairs selected by the Minister
in charge of Environmental Affairs.
- Three representatives from non-governmental organizations concerned
with the environment selected in agreement with the Minister in charge of
Environmental Affairs.
- A high-ranking employee of the Environmental Affairs Agency selected
by the Minister in charge of Environmental Affairs on the basis of a
proposal by the CEO of the Agency.
- The head of the Legal Opinions Department at the Council of State.
- Three representatives from the public business sector selected by the
Minister in charge of Environmental Affairs.
- Two representatives from universities and scientific research centres
selected by the Minister in charge of Environmental Affairs.
Representatives of the ministries concerned shall be invited whenever
subjects related to the sectors under their supervision are discussed by
the Board. The Board may solicit the assistance of experts having no
counted vote in the deliberations when considering specific issues. The
Board of Directors may form advisory committees of experts to study
certain subjects and may entrust one or more of its members with a
specific task. 
Article 7:
The Agency's Board of Directors is the supreme authority governing its affairs,
running its business and drawing up the general policy it will follow. The Board
may adopt whatever resolutions it deems necessary to fulfill the objects for
which the Agency was established, within the framework of the national plan
and in accordance with the executive regulations of this Law.
Article 8:
The Board of Directors shall meet at the invitation of its Chairman at least once
every three months or at the request of half of its members. Board Meetings
shall be valid if attended by half the number of its members. Resolutions shall
be taken by a majority of the voting members attending the meeting. In case of
a tie, the Chairman shall have the casting vote.
Article 9:
If the Chairman of the Board is absent or cannot attend the meeting he shall be
replaced by the deputy Chairman.
Article 10:
The Chairman of the Board shall represent the Agency in its relation with third
parties and before the courts.
Article 11:
The CEO of the Agency shall be responsible for the implementation of the
general policy adopted to fulfill its objects and for implementing the resolutions
of the Board of Directors. The executive regulations of this Law shall determine
his other powers.
Article 12:
The Agency shall have a Secretary-General appointed from high-ranking
Agency employees by a decree of the Minister in charge of Environmental
Affairs after consulting the CEO, he shall assist the CEO and work under his
supervision.
Article 13:
The CEO of the Agency shall have the ministerial powers prescribed in laws
and regulations over Agency employees, with regard to whom , the SecretaryGeneral shall have the authority of the head of the sector 
CHAPTER THREE
ENVIRONMENT PROTECTION FUND
Article 14:
A special fund shall be established in the Agency under the name "the
Environment Protection Fund" to which shall devolve:
a. Amounts allocated in the state budget to subsidize the fund.
b. Grants and donations presented by national and foreign organizations
and accepted by the Board of Directors of the Agency for the purpose of
protecting and promoting the environment.
c. Fines levied and damages awarded or agreed upon for any harm caused
to the environment.
d. The financial resources of the protectorates fund provided for in Law 102
of 1983.
Amounts collected on a temporary basis on account of fines and
damages for harm caused to the environment shall be deposited in the
fund and held in trust.
The fund shall have a special balance sheet and its fiscal year shall
commence and end with that of the state. Any surplus shall be carried
over to the following year. The money in this fund shall be deemed public
money.
Article 15:
The resources of the fund shall be allocated to the fulfillment of its objects.
Article 16:
The Agency shall lay down the internal regulations of the fund in agreement
with the Minister of Finance. All the activities and transactions of the fund shall
be subject to the control of the Central Audit Agency. 
CHAPTER FOUR
INCENTIVES
Article 17:
The agency shall, in collaboration with the Ministry of Finance, establish a
system of incentives that the Agency and the competent administrative
departments can present to other agencies, establishments, individuals and
others for their environmental protection activities or projects.
Article 18:
The system of incentives mentioned in the preceding Article shall be submitted
to the Board of Directors of EEAA and approved by the Prime Minister.
PART ONE
PROTECTION OF LAND ENVIRONMENT
FROM POLLUTION
CHAPTER ONE
DEVELOPMENT AND ENVIRONMENT
Article 19:
The competent administrative authority or the licensing authority shall assess
the environmental impact of the establishment for which a license is sought by
reference to the elements, designs, specifications and criteria issued by the
EEAA in agreement with the competent administrative authorities. The
executive regulations of the Law shall determine the establishments to which
the provisions of this article apply.
Article 20:
The competent administrative authorities or the licensing authority shall send a
copy of the environmental impact assessment mentioned in the preceding
Article to the EEAA, to express its opinion thereon and propose measures
required to be taken in the field of preparations and systems in order to treat
negative environmental effects. The said authorities shall verify the
implementation of the EEAA's proposals. The EEAA is required to furnish the
competent administrative authority or the licensing authority with its opinion on
the assessment within a maximum of 60 days from receiving same, otherwise
the assessment shall be deemed to have been accepted by the EEAA. 
Article 21:
The competent administrative authority shall notify the owner of the
establishment of the result of the assessment by a registered letter with return
receipt requested. The owner of the establishment may object to the result in
writing within thirty days of notification before a committee to be formed by a
decree of the Minister in charge of Environmental Affairs. The EEAA, the
competent administrative authority or the licensing authority and the owner of
the establishment shall be represented on the committee. The executive
regulations shall determine the functions of the committee as well as its
operating and complaint procedures.
Article 22:
Pursuant to the provisions of this Law, the owner of an establishment shall keep
a written register to record the impact of his establishment activities on the
environment. The executive regulations will determine the standard form of the
required register, the time frame of the establishment obligation to keep it and
the data to be entered therein. The EEAA is authorized to follow up entries in
the register to ensure that they conform to the facts, to take samples as
required and to conduct appropriate tests to determine the impact of the
establishment activities on the environment and the extent of its compliance
with the criteria laid down for the protection of the environment. In case of any
violation, the EEAA shall notify the competent administrative authority to direct
the owner of the establishment to rectify such violation forthwith. If the owner
fails to comply within 60 days, the EEAA shall be entitled, in agreement with the
competent administrative authority, to take such legal and judicial procedures
as are necessary to stop the offending activity and claim adequate damages to
redress the harm resulting from the violation.
Article 23:
Expansions and renovations of existing establishments shall be subject to the
same provisions set forth in Articles 19, 20, 21 and 22 of this Law.
Article 24:
Environmental monitoring networks with their stations and working units shall be
formed, pursuant to the provisions of this Law, and shall undertake, in their
respective fields of specialization, to monitor the components and pollutants of
the environment on a regular basis and make the results available to the
authorities concerned. For the fulfillment of the foregoing, the networks may call
on the assistance of research centres and competent authorities which shall
furnish the networks with the studies and information they request. The Agency
shall supervise the establishment and operation of the environmental monitoring
networks. 
Article 25:
The Agency shall lay down a contingency plan to deal with environmental
disasters which shall be approved by the Cabinet. The contingency plan will be
based in particular on the following:
- Gathering the information available at the national and international
levels on ways of confronting environmental disasters and mitigating their
harmful effects.
- Identifying the resources available at the national, regional and
international levels and determining how they can be deployed to ensure
a swift response to the disaster.
The contingency plan will include the following:
- Identifying the types of environmental disasters and the agencies
responsible for reporting or predicting their occurrence.
- Establishing a central operations room to receive reports of
environmental disasters and follow up the transmission of accurate
information thereon in order to mobilize the necessary resources to deal
with such disasters.
- Forming a task force to follow up the measures taken to confront an
actual or predicted environmental disaster. The leader of the task force
shall be vested with all the powers necessary to confront the disaster in
cooperation and coordination with the competent authorities.
Article 26:
All public and private bodies and all individuals are held to provide prompt
assistance and support, upon request, in order to confront the environmental
disaster. The fund referred to in article 14 of this law shall reimburse private
bodies and individuals for the actual expenses incurred.
Article 27:
An area of not less than one thousand square meters of state-owned land shall
be allocated for the establishment of an arboretum for the cultivation of trees in
each district and in each village. The output of these arboreta shall be available
to agencies and individuals at cost price.
The competent administrative authorities to which these arboreta are affiliated
shall lay down guidelines for the cultivation and protection of these trees. The
EEAA shall participate in financing the establishment of these arboreta. 
Article 28:
It is forbidden to hunt, kill, or catch the species of wild birds and animals
determined in the executive regulations of this Law or to possess, transport,
circulate with, sell or offer to sell such birds and animals either dead or alive. It
is also forbidden to damage the nests or eggs of these birds.
The executive regulations of this Law shall determine the areas to which the
provisions of this article apply and shall specify the conditions for a hunting
license in these areas as well as the competent administrative authorities
responsible for implementing the provisions of this article.
CHAPTER TWO
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS AND WASTE
Article 29:
It is forbidden to displace hazardous substances and waste without a license
from the competent administrative authority. The executive regulations of this
Law shall determine the procedures and conditions for granting such a license
and the authority competent to issue same.
The ministers shall, each in his field of competence, issue in coordination with
the Minister of Health and EEAA a table of the hazardous substances and
waste referred to in para one of this article.
Article 30:
Management of hazardous waste shall be subject to the rules and procedures
laid down in the executive regulations of this Law. The executive regulations
shall designate the competent authority, which, after consulting EEAA, will issue
the table of hazardous waste to which the provisions of this Law shall apply.
Article 31:
It is forbidden to construct any establishment for the treatment of hazardous
waste without a license issued by the competent administrative authority after
consulting the EEAA. Disposal of hazardous waste shall be in accordance with
the conditions and criteria set forth in the executive regulations of this Law. The
Minister of Housing shall, after consulting with the Ministries of Health and
Industry and the EEAA, designate the disposal sites and determine the
conditions of the license to dispose of hazardous waste.
Article 32:
It is forbidden to import hazardous waste or to allow its introduction into or its
passage through Egyptian territories. It is forbidden without a permit from the 
competent authority to allow the passage of ships carrying hazardous waste in
territorial seas or in the exclusive maritime economic zone of the ARE.
Article 33:
Those engaged in the production or circulation of hazardous materials, either in
gas, liquid or solid form, are held to take all precautions to ensure that no
environmental damage shall occur
The owner of an establishment whose activities produce hazardous waste
pursuant to the provisions of this Law shall be held to keep a register of such
waste indicating the method of disposing thereof, and the agencies contracted
with to receive the hazardous waste. The executive regulations shall determine
the data to be recorded in the said register and the EEAA shall be responsible
for following up the register to ensure its conformity with the facts.
PART TWO
PROTECTION OF AIR ENVIRONMENT
FROM POLLUTION
Article 34:
The site on which a project is established must be suitable for the project
activity to ensure that the permissible levels of air pollutants are not
overstepped, and that the total pollution emitted by all the establishments in one
area is within the permissible levels.
The executive regulations of this Law shall determine the establishments
subject to its provisions, the authority competent to approve the site and the
permissible levels of air pollutants and noise in the area where the
establishment is constructed.
Article 35:
In carrying out their activities, establishments subject to the provisions of this
Law are held to ensure that emissions or leakages of air pollutants do not
exceed the maximum levels permitted by laws and decrees in force and
determined in the executive regulations of this Law.
Article 36:
It is prohibited to use machines, engines or vehicles whose exhaust emissions
exceed the limits set by the executive regulations of this Law. 
Article 37:
It is prohibited to throw, treat or burn garbage and solid waste except in special
sites designated for such purpose which are far from residential, industrial or
agricultural areas as well as from water-ways. The executive regulations of this
Law shall determine the specifications and conditions of such sites and their
minimum distance from the areas referred to hereinabove.
Local units shall, in agreement with the EEAA, designate the sites for burning,
throwing or treating garbage and solid waste according to the provisions of this
article.
Article 38:
It is prohibited to spray or use pesticides or any other chemical compound for
agriculture, public health or other purpose except after observing the conditions,
regulations and safety measures laid down in the executive regulations of this
Law and in a manner that will not expose humans, animals, plants, waterways
and other components of the environment, directly or indirectly, now or in future,
to the harmful effects of such pesticides or chemical compounds.
Article 39:
All organizations and individuals shall be held, when carrying out exploration,
excavation, construction or demolition works or when transporting the resultant
waste or debris, to take the necessary precautions to secure the safe storage or
transportation thereof to prevent loose particles from escaping into the air, in
accordance with the provisions of the executive regulations.
Article 40:
It is mandatory when burning any type of fuel or otherwise, whether for
industrial, energy production, construction or other commercial purpose, that the
harmful smoke, gases, and vapors resulting from the combustion process are
within the permissible limits. The person responsible for such activity shall be
held to take all precautions necessary to minimize the pollutants in the
combustion products. The executive regulations of this Law shall define such
precautions as well as the permissible limits and the specifications of chimneys
and other means of controlling the emission of the smoke, gases, and vapors
resulting from the combustion process.
Article 41:
All organizations undertaking activities in the field of exploration, drilling,
extraction and production of crude oil, its refining and processing shall observe
the regulations and procedures set forth in the Law and its executive regulations
which are derived from principles governing the international petroleum industry
as provided by the competent administrative authority. 
Article 42:
All organizations and individuals shall be held, when carrying out production,
service or other activities, particularly when operating machinery and equipment
or using sirens and loudspeakers, to keep the volume below the permissible
sound intensity level.
Licensing authorities shall ensure that the total sounds emanating from fixed
sources in one area shall be within the permissible levels, and ascertain that the
establishments select the appropriate machinery and equipment to guarantee
this. The executive regulations of this Law shall define the permissible levels of
sound intensity and the permissible time limits for exposure thereto.
Article 43:
The owner of an establishment is held to take all precautions and procedures
necessary to prevent the leakage or emission of air pollutants inside the work
premises except within the permissible limits as defined by the executive
regulations of this Law, whether they result from the nature of the establishment
activities or from malfunctioning equipment. He has to provide the necessary
protective measures for workers in accordance with the conditions of
occupational safety and health, including choosing the appropriate machinery,
equipment, material and fuel, taking into account the period of exposure to
these pollutants. He must also ensure adequate ventilation and install
chimneys and other air purification devices.
Article 44:
The owner of an establishment shall take the necessary procedures to maintain
temperature and humidity inside the work-place within the permissible limits. In
cases where it is necessary to work beyond these limits, he shall be held to
secure appropriate protective measures for the workers, whether by providing
them with special clothing or otherwise. The executive regulations of this Law
shall set the maximum and minimum limits of temperature and humidity and the
duration of exposure thereto as well as the protective measures.
Article 45:
Closed and semi-closed public places must have adequate ventilation facilities
consistent with the size of the place and its assimilative capacity as well as with
the type of activity exercised therein to ensure renewal and purity of the air and
maintain it at a suitable temperature. 
Article 46:
The director in charge of the establishment must take adequate measures to
prevent smoking in closed public places except within the permissible limits
specified in the license issued for such establishments. In such case, a special
area shall be reserved for smokers in such a way as not to affect the air in other
areas.
Smoking is prohibited in means of public transport.
Article 47:
The level of radioactivity or concentration of radioactive substances in the air
shall not exceed the permissible limits as determined by the competent
authorities in accordance with the executive regulations of this Law.
PART THREE
PROTECTION OF WATER ENVIRONMENT
FROM POLLUTION
CHAPTER ONE
POLLUTION FROM SHIPS
Section One
Oil Pollution
Article 48:
The aim of protecting the water environment from pollution is to achieve the
following objectives:
a. To protect the coasts and ports of the Arab Republic of Egypt from the
risks of pollution in all its forms and shapes.
b- To protect the environment of the territorial sea and the exclusive
economic zone and their living or non-living natural resources by
preventing, controlling and reducing pollution from any source. 
c- To protect the natural resources in the economic zone and the continental
shelf.
d- To compensate any natural or juridical person for any injury they sustain
from the pollution of the water environment.
The Minister for Environmental Affairs in conjunction with the Minister of
Maritime Transport and the competent administrative authorities referred
to in para (38) of article (1) of this Law shall undertake to fulfill the
aforesaid objectives, each within their respective fields of competence.
Article 49:
Ships of any nationality are forbidden to discharge oil or oily mixtures in the
territorial sea or the exclusive economic zone of the Arab Republic of Egypt.
Military ships or support naval vessels of the Arab Republic of Egypt and other
ships owned or operated by the state or by public authorities which are used in
non-commercial governmental service and which are not subject to the
provisions of the Convention shall take all necessary precautions to prevent
pollution of the territorial sea or the exclusive economic zone of the Arab
Republic of Egypt.
Article 50:
Ships registered in the Arab Republic of Egypt are forbidden to discharge oily or
oil mixtures into the sea, in accordance with the Convention and international
agreements to which the Arab Republic of Egypt adheres.
Article 51:
Foreign oil tankers calling at Egyptian ports must comply with all the
requirements of Rule 13 of Annex 1 of the Convention as amended.
Oil tankers used in short voyages are exempt from these requirements pursuant
to Rule 13c of the Convention as amended, as are oil tankers navigating the
Suez Canal which are not obliged to discharge unclean ballast water.
Article 52:
National and foreign companies and organizations licensed to explore, extract
or exploit off-shore oil fields and other marine natural resources, including oil
transport facilities, are forbidden to discharge any polluting substances resulting
from drilling, exploration, testing of wells or production in the territorial sea or
the exclusive economic zone of the Arab Republic or Egypt. They are held to
use safe measures not liable to harm the water environment and to treat any
discharged waste or polluting substance according to the available technical
methods and in accordance with the regulations of international conventions.
Article 53:
Without prejudice to the provisions of Law 79 of 1961 concerning marine
disasters and shipwrecks, representatives of the competent administrative
authority or judicial officers vested with the power to effect seizures shall be
entitled to order the captain or the person in charge of the ship to take
appropriate protection measures against the effects of pollution in the event of
an accident involving a ship carrying an oil cargo which may pollute the
territorial sea or the exclusive economic zone of the Arab Republic of Egypt.
Article 54:
The penalties prescribed in this Law shall not apply to cases of pollution
resulting from:
a- Securing the safety of a ship or the lives of those on board.
b- Discharge resulting from damage to a ship or its equipment, provided
such damage was not caused by the master or the person in charge to
disable or destroy the ship or as a result of negligence. In all cases,
the master of the ship or the person in charge thereof must have taken
before and after the occurrence of damage all necessary precautions
to prevent or reduce the effects of pollution and must have
immediately notified the competent administrative authority.
c- A sudden break in the pipeline carrying oil or oily mixtures during the
operating, drilling, exploring or testing of oil wells, without any
negligence in supervising or maintaining the pipelines, provided
sufficient precautions to supervise the operation of the pipeline and
immediate measures to control the pollution and its sources have been
taken.
This shall be without prejudice to the right of the competent authority to recover
the costs of removing the effects of pollution from the party responsible therefor
and to claim damages for losses incurred and injuries sustained by reason of
such pollution.
Article 55:
The owner of the ship, its master or any person responsible therefor and those
responsible for means of oil transport within the port areas or the territorial sea
or the exclusive economic zone of the ARE and the companies working in the
field of oil extraction are held to notify the competent administrative authorities
of any oil spill immediately on its occurrence, with a description of the
circumstances of the accident, the type of oil involved and the measures taken
to stop or reduce the spill and such other information as determined in the
Convention and the executive regulations of this Law.
In all cases, the competent administrative authorities are held to notify the
EEAA of all particulars concerning the incident promptly on its occurrence. 
Article 56:
All loading ports, ports equipped to receive oil tankers and all dockyards must
be fitted out with the necessary equipment to receive unclean ballast water and
the bilge wager from cleaning the tanks of oil tankers and other ships.
Ports must be equipped with enough barges and containers to receive the
deposits, residues, and waste of oil and oily mixtures from ships docked in port.
No ship or tanker may be licensed to carry out loading and unloading works
except after referring to the competent administrative authority which will
receive and direct it to the locations for the disposal of waste and unclean
ballast water.
Article 57:
he competent minister shall determine the tools and equipment for reducing
pollution with which all ships registered in ARE or off-shore platforms installed in
the water environment must be fitted out.
Foreign ships calling at Egyptian ports or passing through their littoral zones
must be fitted out with pollution reducing equipment in accordance with the
provisions of the Convention and its annexes.
Article 58:
Owners or masters of ships registered in the ARE as well as of ships pertaining
to the states adhering to the Convention are held to keep a register of the oil on
board in which shall be entered all operations relating to oil in the manner
determined in the Convention, and in particular the following operations:
a- Loading, delivery or other oil cargo transport operations, while
designating the type of oil.
b- Discharge of oil or oily mixture to secure the safety of the ship or its
cargo or to save lives, while designating the type of oil.
c- Oil or oily mixture spills as a result of a collision or accident, while
indicating the size of the spill.
d- Discharge of unclean ballast water or of bilge water from cleaning the
tanks.
e. Disposal of polluting waste.
f. Discharge of machinery space bilges, containing the oil collected within
the machinery space, outside the ship while in port. 
The executive regulations shall determine the means of recording the
processes of discharging oil or oily mixture, in respect of off-shore platforms
installed in the water environment.
Article 59:
Without prejudice to the provisions of the International Convention on Civil
Liability for Injuries Resulting from Oil Pollution Accidents signed in Brussels in
1969 as amended, all oil tankers whose total tonnage amounts to 2,000 tons or
more and which are registered in ARE, and other oil transport equipment whose
total tonnage amounts to 150 tons or more operating in the territorial sea or the
exclusive economic zone of ARE, are held to present a financial guarantee
certificate in the form of insurance or indemnity bond or any other form of
guarantee to the competent administrative authority in accordance with the
guidelines laid down in a decree from the Minister of Maritime Transport in
agreement with the Minister of Petroleum and the Minister for Environmental
Affairs.
The guarantee certificate must be presented when the tanker enters the
territorial sea and shall be valid and cover all damages and compensation as
assessed by the competent administrative authority.
With regard to ships registered in a country adhering to the International
Convention on Civil Liability for Injuries Resulting from Oil Pollution Accidents,
such certificate shall be issued from the competent authority in the country
where the ship is registered.
Section Two
Pollution By Harmful Substances
Article 60:
It is prohibited for tankers carrying harmful liquid substances to discharge any
harmful substances, waste or deposits intentionally or unintentionally, directly or
indirectly, resulting in harm to the water environment or public health or to other
legitimate uses of the sea. It is also prohibited for ships carrying harmful
substances in receptacles, cisterns portable tanks or land or railroad containers
to dispose of such substances in the territorial sea or in the exclusive economic
zone of ARE.

It is prohibited to throw dead animals in the territorial sea or the exclusive
economic zone of ARE.
Article 61:
All loading and unloading ports equipped to receive the tankers referred to in
the first paragraph of the previous article, as well as all dockyards, shall be fitted
out with adequate facilities to receive the harmful liquid substances and their
wastes.
Article 62:
Tankers carrying harmful liquid substances must be provided with a cargo
register pursuant to the Convention, in which the master of the ship or the
person responsible for it shall record all operations as stated in the Convention.
Article 63:
Representatives of the competent administrative authority and the judicial
officers vested with the power to effect seizures shall have the authority to order
the ship's master or the person responsible for it to take the necessary
measures to reduce the effects of pollution in the event of an accident to any
ship carrying harmful substances that may pollute the territorial sea or the
exclusive economic zone of the ARE in any way. Ships carrying harmful
substances are forbidden to dump polluting substances and waste in the
continental shelf or the exclusive economic zone of ARE.
Article 64:
The provisions of Article 54 of this Law shall apply to cases of pollution resulting
from measures taken to save lives on board or to save the ship itself from harm.
Article 65:
The ship's master or the responsible person is held to implement all the
conditions stated in Rule 8 of Annex 2 of the Convention.
Section Three
Pollution from Sewage and Garbage
Article 66:
Ships and off-shore platforms are prohibited from discharging their polluted
waste-water in the territorial sea or the exclusive economic zone of the ARE. It
must be disposed of according to the criteria and procedures laid down in the
executive regulations of this Law.
Article 67:
All ships and off-shore platforms working in the field of exploration and
exploitation of natural and mineral resources in the water environment of the
ARE as well as ships calling at Egyptian ports, are forbidden to dispose of their
garbage in the territorial sea or in the exclusive economic zone. Ships are held
to deliver garbage to the reception facilities or to places designated by the
competent administrative authority for fees to be fixed by a decree of the
competent Minister.
Article 68:
All loading and unloading ports, all ports equipped to receive ships and all
stable or floating dockyards must be fitted out with the necessary and adequate
facilities to receive polluted waste water and garbage from ships.
CHAPTER TWO
POLLUTION FROM LAND BASED SOURCES
Article 69:
t is prohibited for all establishments, including public places and commercial,
industrial, touristic and service establishments, to discharge or throw any
untreated substances, wastes or liquids which may cause pollution along the
Egyptian sea shores or adjoining waters either directly or indirectly, intentionally
or unintentionally. Each day of such prohibited discharge shall be considered
as a separate violation.
Article 70:
No building permits shall be granted for establishments or public places on or
near the sea shore, which would result in the discharge of polluting substances
in violation of the provisions of this Law and the decrees issued in
implementation thereof unless the applicant for such permit conducts
environmental impact studies and undertakes to provide waste treatment units
and to operate them as soon as the establishment commences work.
Article 71:
The executive regulations of this Law shall define the specifications and criteria
which must be observed by industrial establishments allowed to discharge
degradable polluted substances after they have been treated. The
administrative authority, specified in the said executive regulations, shall
conduct periodic analysis of samples of the treated liquid waste in its
laboratories and notify the competent administrative authorities of the results.
In case of violations, the party concerned shall be granted a grace period of one
month to treat the waste and render it compatible with the said specifications
and standards. If treatment is not completed within the grace period as
aforesaid or if the tests carried out during such period prove that continued 
discharge would result in severe harm to the water environment, discharge shall
be halted by administrative means and the establishment license shall be
revoked without prejudice to the penalties prescribed in this Law. In addition,
the executive regulations shall specify the non-degradable polluting substances
which industrial establishments are prohibited from discharging in the water
environment.
Article 72:
Without prejudice to the provisions of article 96 of this Law, representatives of
the juridical persons or managers of the establishments mentioned in article 69
which discharge in the water environment shall be responsible for any acts
carried out by their employees in violation of the provisions of the said article as
well as for providing means of treatment in accordance with the criteria and
specifications laid down in the executive regulations and shall be liable to the
penalties prescribed in Article 87 of this Law.
Article 73:
It is prohibited to construct any establishment within 200 meters of the Egyptian
coast lines without the permission of the competent administrative authority in
coordination with the EEAA. The executive regulations of this Law shall lay
down the procedures and conditions to be followed in this connection.
Article 74:
It is prohibited to take any measures that may affect the natural coast line or
alter its configuration either inwards or outwards, without the approval of the
competent authority in coordination with EEAA. The executive regulations of
this law shall regulate the procedures and conditions to be followed in this
connection.
Article 75:
The representatives of the concerned administrative authorities shall be entitled,
each within its scope of competence and in coordination with the EEAA, to enter
the exclusion zones referred to in articles 73 and 74 of this Law in order to
inspect works being carried out therein. If they discover that works contrary to
the foregoing provisions are being executed or are intended to be executed, the
violator shall be ordered to restore matters to their original state otherwise the
works will be halted administratively and matters restored to their original state
at the expense of the violator and the beneficiary jointly. Payment shall be
collected by means of administrative attachment.
CHAPTER THREE 
INTERNATIONAL CERTIFICATES
Article 76:
Egyptian ships are held to obtain from the Ports and Lighthouse Department the
international oil pollution prevention certificate or the international certificate for
the prevention of pollution resulting from cargoes of harmful liquid substances in
bulk. The issuance of the said certificates shall be in accordance with the
provisions and conditions set forth in the Convention and the validity of the
certificate shall not exceed five years from the date of its issuance.
Article 77:
All ships regularly carrying oil to or from Egyptian ports or from other oil
transportation means within the territorial sea or the exclusive economic zone of
ARE and which fly the flag of a state that is a signatory of the Convention must
carry the international oil pollution prevention certificate which should be valid
according to the Convention.
With regard to ships subject to the provisions of para 1 of this Article and flying
the flag of a state that does not adhere to the Convention, the Minister of
Maritime Transport shall determine the oil pollution prevention certificate that
will be granted by the Ports and Lighthouse Department before licensing such
ships to carry oil on a regular basis from an Egyptian port or from one of the
means of oil transport within the exclusive economic zone.
CHAPTER FOUR
ADMINISTRATIVE AND JUDICIAL PROCEDURES
Article 78:
Representatives of competent administrative authorities and consular officials
abroad shall be deemed judicial law officers vested with the power to effect
seizures in respect of the application of the provisions of Part Three of this Law.
The Minister of Justice in agreement with the competent ministers can vest
other officials with this capacity according to the needs for implementing this
Law and in compliance with the rules of International Law.
Article 79:
The judicial officers referred to in the preceding article are authorized in case of
violation, and if the ship's master or the person responsible therefor wishes to
leave the port immediately, to collect sums of money on a temporary basis
pending settlement of the fines imposed and the damages awarded pursuant to
the provisions of Part Four of this Law, provided the amount so collected shall 
not be less than the minimum prescribed for the violation in addition to all
expenses and damages determined by the competent administrative authority
to remove the effects of the violation.
A financial guarantee covering the value of these amounts and accepted by the
competent administrative authority may be presented, without prejudice to the
provisions of the International Convention on Civil Liability for Oil Pollution
signed in Brussels in 1969.
Article 80:
Without prejudice to the provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, the
officers referred to in article 78 shall be entitled to board ships and off-shore
platforms, and to enter establishments built on the shore and inspect the means
used to transport oil and marine polluting substances to ensure compliance with
the provisions of this Law and the decrees issued in implementation thereof as
well as the availability of waste treatment equipment.
The competent administrative authority shall issue its decision on what it
regards as necessary for the protection of the marine environment in the light of
the results of this procedure. The party concerned can object to this decision
before the appeals committee mentioned in article 81 of this Law within fifteen
days from the date of his notification thereof. Such objection shall not result in
suspending implementation of the decision unless the said committee issues a
decision to suspend its implementation until the settlement of the dispute.
Article 81:
The minister concerned, as designated by the executive regulations of this Law
shall issue a decree for the formation of the appeals committee. The committee
shall be located within the working area of the port or in a nearby administrative
authority and shall consist of the following members:
- A counselor from the State Council - Chairman.
- Representative of EEAA.
- Representative of the Ports and Lighthouses Department
- Representative of the Ministry of Defense.
- Representative of the Ministry of Petroleum and Mineral Wealth.
- Representative of the competent administrative authority within the scope
of whose activities the violation occurred. 
The committee may solicit the advice of one or more experts in the field of water
environment. The function of this committee shall be to settle administrative
disputes arising from the implementation of the provisions of Part Three of this
Law. The committee shall issue its decision, after hearing both parties, by a
majority decision of members present and in case of a tie, the chairman shall
have the casting vote. The parties concerned may challenge the committee's
decision before the Administrative Court of the State Council.
Article 82:
Every master or user of a ship calling at the Egyptian ports or licensed to
operate in the territorial sea or the exclusive economic zone of ARE should
provide the representatives of the competent administrative authority or the
judicial officers responsible for implementing the provisions of this Law with the
facilities required to perform their functions.
Article 83:
The competent administrative authorities may request assistance from the
ministries of defense, interior, petroleum, and mineral resources, as well as
from the Suez Canal Authority or any other competent agency, in implementing
the provisions of Part Three of this Law according to the conditions laid down in
the decree of the competent Minister.
PART FOUR
PENALTIES
Article 84:
Whoever violates the provisions of Article 28 of this Law shall be fined a sum of
not less than two hundred Egyptian pounds and not more than five thousand
Egyptian pounds. In addition, birds and animals seized as well as the machines
and equipment used in the violation shall be confiscated.
Article 85:
Whoever violates the provisions of Articles 30, 31 and 33 of this Law shall be
imprisoned for a period of not less than one year and/or fined ten thousand to
twenty thousand Egyptian Pounds.
Article 86:
Whoever violates the provisions of article 36 of this Law shall be fined a sum of
not less than two hundred Egyptian Pounds and not more than three hundred
Egyptian Pounds. As to violations of the provisions of article 39 of this Law,
these shall be punishable by a fine of not less than five hundred Egyptian
Pounds and not more than one thousand Egyptian Pounds. The court may
order the suspension of the license for a period of not less than one week and 
not more than six months, and in case of recidivism, the court may revoke the
license.
Article 87:
Whoever violates the provisions of article 42 of this Law by using loudspeakers
with a volume exceeding the permissible levels of sound intensity shall be
punished by a fine of not less than one hundred Egyptian Pounds and not more
than five hundred Egyptian Pounds and the machines and equipment used in
the violation shall be confiscated. Violators of the provisions of articles 38, 41,
69, and 70 of this Law shall be punished by a fine of not less than two hundred
Egyptian Pounds and not more than twenty thousand Egyptian Pounds.
The fines imposed on those who violate the provisions of articles 35, 37, 40, 43,
44, or 45 of this Law shall be not less than one thousand Egyptian Pounds and
not more than twenty thousand Egyptian Pounds. The same fine shall apply in
respect of the non-compliance of the manager in charge of the establishment
with the requirement to ban smoking in closed public places in violation of the
provisions of para 1 of article 46 of this Law.
Anyone who smokes while using public transportation in violation of the
provisions of para 2 of the said article shall be fined a sum of not less than ten
Egyptian Pounds and not more than fifty Egyptian Pounds.
In case of recidivism, the penalty shall be imprisonment and the fine provided
for in the preceding paragraphs.
Article 88:
Any person who violates the provisions of articles 29, 32, and 47 of the present
Law shall be punished by imprisonment for a term of not less than five years
and a fine of twenty thousand Egyptian Pounds to forty thousand Egyptian
Pounds. Whoever violates the provisions of Article 32 shall be held to re-export
the hazardous wastes subject of the crime at his own expense.
Article 89:
Any person who violates the provisions of article 2, the last paragraph of article
3, or articles 4, 5, and 7 of Law No. 48 of 1982 concerning the protection of the
River Nile and waterways from pollution, and of the decrees issued in
implementation thereof shall be fined a sum of not less than two hundred
Egyptian Pounds and not more than twenty thousand Egyptian Pounds.
In case of recidivism, the penalty shall be both imprisonment and the fine
provided for in the previous paragraph.
In all cases, the violator shall be held to remove or rectify the violating works by
the date determined by the Ministry of Public Works and Water Resources. If
the violating works are not removed or rectified by the due date, the Ministry of
Public Works and Water Resources shall have the right to take procedures to 
remove or rectify the violation by administrative means, at the expense of the
violator, without prejudice to the right of the Ministry to revoke the license.
Article 90:
Whoever commits one of the following acts shall be fined a sum of not less than
one hundred and fifty thousand Egyptian Pounds and not more than five
hundred thousand Egyptian Pounds.
1. Discharges oil or oily mixtures or harmful substances in the territorial sea
or the exclusive economic zone in violation of articles 49 and 60 of this
Law.
2. Fails to comply with the requirement to treat the wastes and polluting
substances discharged, or fails to use safe procedures which prevent
damage to the water environment in violation of article 52 of this Law.
3. Discharges any other substance that pollutes the environment.
In case of recidivism, the penalty shall be both imprisonment and the fine
provided for in the preceding paragraph.
In all cases, the violator shall be held to remove the effects of the violation
within the time frame determined by the competent administrative authority,
otherwise the administrative authority shall proceed with the removal at his
expense.
Article 91:
A penalty of imprisonment and/or a fine of not less than one hundred and fifty
thousand pounds and not more than five hundred thousand pounds shall be
imposed on any one violating the provisions of article 54 hereof. Such party
shall also be charged with the expenses of removing the effects of such
violation as determined by the authorities commissioned to effect removal, if
unloading, resulting from damage to the ship or its equipment, is carried out in
order to delay or damage the ship or is due to negligence.
The fine shall be doubled in case of recidivism, and the executive regulations of
the present Law shall lay down parameters for determining the value of the fine
by reference to the extent of pollution and the environmental consequences
arising from the violation of this article.
Article 92:
Whoever commits one of the following acts shall be fined a sum of not less than
seventy thousand Egyptian Pounds and not more than three hundred thousand
Egyptian Pounds: 
1. Fails to fit out a foreign ship using Egyptian ports or navigating through
the special marine area with pollution control equipment, in violation of
article 57 of this Law.
2. Fails to take the necessary precautions to prevent or reduce the effects
of pollution before and after the occurrence of damage to the ship or to
its equipment or fails to promptly notify the competent administrative
authority of the discharge resulting from damage to the ship or to its
equipment in violation of the provisions of article 54-b of this Law.
3. Fails to promptly notify the competent administrative authority of any oil
spill, the circumstances in which it occurred, the nature and percentage
of the substance discharged and the measures taken, in violation of the
provisions of article 55 of this Law.
The fine shall be doubled in case of recidivism in respect of item (1), while the
repetition of the violations mentioned in items (2) and (3) shall be punished by
imprisonment and/or a fine of not less than three hundred thousand Egyptian
Pounds and not more than five hundred thousand Egyptian Pounds.
In all cases, the violator shall be held to remove the effects of the violation
within the time frame determined by the competent administrative authority,
otherwise the administrative authority shall proceed with their removal at the
expense of the violator.
Article 93:
Whoever commits one of the following acts shall be fined a sum of not less than
forty thousand Egyptian Pounds and not more than two hundred thousand
Egyptian Pounds:
1. Loading and unloading works by ships or tankers without having a
license from the competent administrative authority in violation of the
provisions of article 56 of this Law.
2. Failure of the ship or the tanker to keep the certificates and registers
stipulated in articles 58, 62, 76 and 77 of this Law.
3. Discharges polluted waste-water or throws garbage from ships in
violation of the provisions of articles 66 and 67 of this Law.
4. Discharges oil or oily mixtures into the sea in violation of the provisions
of article 50 of this Law by any ship registered in the Arab Republic of
Egypt.
Article 94:
Whoever commits one of the following acts shall be fined a sum of not less than
forty thousand Egyptian Pounds and not more than one hundred and fifty
thousand Egyptian Pounds:
1. Fails to fit out the ships registered in ARE with the instruments and
equipment necessary to reduce pollution in violation of the provisions of
article 57 of this Law.
2. Contravenes the orders of the inspectors of the competent
administrative authority or the judicial officers in case of an accident to a
ship carrying oil or harmful substances pursuant to the provisions of
articles 53 and 63 of this Law.
Article 95:
Whoever intentionally violates the provisions of this Law shall be punished by
imprisonment for a term of not more than 10 years if such violation results in
causing a permanent incurable disability to an individual. The penalty shall be
imprisonment if the violation results in causing this infirmity to three or more
persons.
If the violation results in the death of a person, the penalty shall be temporary
hard labour, and if it results in the death of three persons or more the penalty
shall be permanent hard labour.
Article 96:
The ship's master or the person responsible therefor and the parties to
contracts for the exploration, extraction and exploitation of marine oil fields and
other natural resources including oil transport facilities as well as the owners of
the establishments mentioned in article 69 of this Law shall be jointly liable,
each within his scope of competence, for any harm that befalls any natural or
juridical person as a result of a violation of the provisions of this Law as well as
for payment of imposed fines and the expenses of removing the effects of such
violations.
Article 97:
The penalties stipulated in the previous articles shall be imposed on all ships of
all nationalities and types including those belonging to states not bound by the
Convention if they discharge oil or oily mixtures or commit prohibited dumping
or submerging in the territorial sea or the exclusive economic zone of the ARE.
Article 98:
Penalties for violating the provisions of articles 73 and 74 of this Law shall be
imprisonment for a period of not more than six months and/or a fine of not less
than one thousand Egyptian Pounds and not more than twenty thousand
Egyptian Pounds. 
The court may not order a stay of execution of the fine, and in all cases, the
violating works must be halted and removed by administrative means at the
expense of the violator and the machinery, equipment and materials used in
these works shall be seized without awaiting a court sentence. In case of
conviction, such machinery and equipment shall be confiscated.
Article 99:
Jurisdiction over the crimes referred to in this Law shall lie with the court within
the circumscription of which any such crime is committed, if it is committed by
the ships referred to in article 97 within the territorial waters of the ARE or in the
exclusive economic zone. The court shall rule on the case expeditiously.
Jurisdiction over the crimes committed outside the two areas mentioned in this
article shall lie with the court within the circumscription of which the port in
which the ship flying the Egyptian flag is registered. 
Article 100:
Without prejudice to the provisions of Article 79, the competent administrative
authority may take legal procedures to detain any ship which fails to pay the
instant fines and/or in the summary cases stipulated in the said article.
Such detention shall be lifted if due payments are made or an unconditional
financial guarantee accepted by the competent administrative authority is
presented.
Article 101:
The imposition of the penalties stipulated in this Law shall be without prejudice
to the imposition of any more severe penalty prescribed in another law.
FINAL PROVISIONS
Article 102:
Without prejudice to the provisions of article 78 of this Law, the employees of
the EEAA and its branches in the governorates designated by a decree of the
Minister of Justice in agreement with the Minister in charge of Environmental
Affairs shall have the capacity of judicial officers vested with the power to effect
seizures in proving the commission of crimes in violation of the provisions of this
Law or the decrees issued in implementation thereof.
Article 103:
Every citizen and organization concerned with the protection of the environment
shall have the right to report any violation of the provisions of this Law.
Article 104:
Inspectors of administrative authorities concerned as well as the inspectors of
the Environmental Affairs Agency (EEAA) who have the capacity of judicial
officers in matters relating to the environment shall be held, each in his field of
competence, to report to the authority to which they belong any violation of the
provisions of this Law and the authorities concerned shall then take the
necessary legal procedures. 
EXECUTIVE REGULATION
OF
LAW NUMBER 4 of 1994
EGYPT 
PRIME MINISTER’S DECREE 
Prime Minister's Decree No. 338 of 1995
Issuing the Executive Regulations of the
Environment Law promulgated by
Law No. 4 of 1994(2)
The Prime Minister,
After reviewing Law No. 4 of 1994 promulgating
the Environment Law, and
The presentation made by the
Minister of Environmental Affairs after
consulting the Board of Directors of the
Environmental Affairs Agency, and
Pursuant to the opinion of the Council of State,
Decrees:
Article 1:
The provisions of the attached Executive Regulations of the Environment Law
promulgated by Law No. 4 of 1994 shall come into force.
Article 2:
Without prejudice to the provisions of Article 1 of the aforementioned Law No. 4
of 1994, establishments wishing to extend the prescribed time limit for making
the required adjustments are to submit their applications to the EEAA six
months before the expiration of the three year period prescribed in the abovementioned article. The applications shall include justifications for such an
extension and the procedures taken for the implementation of the provisions of
the attached Executive Regulations.
The EEAA shall be held to verify the submitted data and to ascertain how far
the establishment is willing to implement the provisions of these Executive
Regulations. The EEAA shall submit a detailed report, substantiated with
documents, to the Minister for Environmental Affairs for presentation to the
Cabinet.
The EEAA may, in preparing the report, resort to experts nominated for this
purpose, in which case the applicant requesting the extension shall bear the
costs estimated by the EEAA for these experts.

2 Official Gazette, el-WakaE el-Masreya, Issue No. 51, 28 February 1995. 
Article 3:
This Decree shall be published in the Official Gazette el-Wakaé elMasreya and shall come into force on the day following the date of publication.
Issued in the Cabinet on the 18th of Ramadan 1415 Hejra Year
corresponding to the 18th of February 1995 A.D.
 Prime Minister
 Dr. Atef Sidki
Executive Regulation
OF
LAW NUMBER 4 of 1994
EGYPT 
Table of Contents
PRELIMINARY PART
CHAPTER I: General Provisions (ARTICLE 1)................................... 1
CHAPTER II: Environmental Affairs Agency (ARTICLES 2 to 6)........ 3
CHAPTER III: Environmental Protection Fund (ARTICLES 7 to 8 ) ... 6
CHAPTER IV : Incentives (ARTICLE 9).............................................. 7
PART ONE: PROTECTION OF LAND ENVIRONMENT
 FROM POLLUTION
CHAPTER I: Development and Environment
 (ARTICLES 10 to 24) ..........................................
8
CHAPTER II: Hazardous Material and Waste
 (ARTICLES 25 to 33) ...................................................
14
PART TWO: PROTECTION OF AIR ENVIRONMENT FROM
 POLLUTION (ARTICLES 34 to 49) ............................. 26
PART THREE: PROTECTION OF WATER ENVIRONMENT FROM
POLLUTION
 CHAPTER I: POLLUTION FROM SHIPS ............................................. 37
SECTION I: OIL POLLUTION(ARTICLES 50 TO 53 )...................... 37
SECTION II: POLLUTION FROM SEWAGE AND GARBAGE
(ARTICLES 54 TO 56 ) ................................................
40
CHAPTER II: POLLUTION FROM LAND BASED SOURCES
(ARTICLES 57 to 60 )...................................................
41
CHAPTER III: ADMINISTRATIVE AND JUDICIAL ..........PROCEDURES
(ARTICLES 61 to 63) .....................................................
44
PART FOUR: FINAL PROVISIONS (ARTICLES 64 to 65)............................. 45
ANNEXES TO THE EXECUTIVE REGULATIONS ........................................... 46 
Table of Contents (cont’d)
ANNEX 1 Criteria and specifications for certain substances when
discharged into the marine environment. .............................
47
ANNEX 2 Establishments subject to environmental assessment......... 49
ANNEX 3 Model register of impact of an establishment activities on
the environment [Environmental Condition Register............
51
ANNEX 4 Wild birds and animals prohibited from being hunted,
killed or captured..................................................................
52
ANNEX 5 Maximum limits of outdoor air pollutants.............................. 53
ANNEX 6 Permissible limits of air pollutants in emissions ................... 54
ANNEX 7 Permissible limits of sound intensity and periods of safe
exposure thereto ..................................................................
57
ANNEX 8 Maximum limits of air pollutants inside the work place
according to type of industry ................................................
60
ANNEX 9 Maximum and minimum limits of temperature and
humidity, period of exposure thereto, and means of
protection therefrom .............................................................
79
ANNEX 10 Non-degradable polluting substances which industrial
establishments are prohibited from discharging into the
marine environment .............................................................
82 
2
Executive Regulations of
the Environment Law
PRELIMINARY PART
Chapter I
General Provisions
Article (1)
In the application of the provisions of these Executive Regulations, the
following terms and expressions shall have the meanings hereby assigned to
them:
1. Water Polluting Substances:
Any substance whose discharge into the water environment, intentionally
or unintentionally, leads to a change in its properties, or contributes to
such change directly or indirectly to an extent that can harm man, natural
resources, sea water or marine tourist areas, or which interferes with
other legitimate uses of the sea. These substances include:
A- Oil or oily mixtures.
B- Harmful and dangerous waste as determined in the international
conventions to which the Arab Republic of Egypt adheres.
C- Any other substances (solid-liquid-gas) designated in a decree
issued by the Minister for Environmental Affairs.
D- Untreated industrial waste or effluents from industrial
establishments.
E- Toxic military containers.
F- Substances listed in the Convention and its annexes.
2- Discharges:

Any leakage, spillage, emission, drainage or disposal of any kind of
polluting substances into the water of the territorial sea, the exclusive
economic zone, the sea, the River Nile and the waterways, taking into
consideration the levels determined for certain substances in Annex (1)
of these Executive Regulations. 
3
3. Compensation:

Means compensation for the damage resulting from pollution accidents in
accordance with the application of the provisions of the Civil Code and
the provisions of the International Convention on Civil Liability to which
the Arab Republic of Egypt adheres or to which it will adhere in future,
including the International Convention on Civil Liability for Damage
resulting by Oil Pollution Accidents signed in Brussels in 1969, or from
pollution accidents involving toxic or any other harmful substances as
well as damage resulting from ships operated by nuclear power, from air
pollution, from the pollution caused by the collision and keeling of ships
or arising during their loading or unloading.
4. The Coastline:

The maximum extent on the land reached by sea water during the
highest tide occurring within a period of not less than eleven years.
5. Territorial Sea:

It is the sea water extended seaward for 12 nautical miles from the coast
of the Arab Republic of Egypt. It is measured from the baseline from
which the width of territorial waters is measured in accordance with the
provisions of the 1982 United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea.
6. Exclusive Economic Zone:

The expanses of sea water extending beyond the territorial sea for a
distance of two hundred nautical miles measured from the baseline.
7. The Sea:

The expanse of sea water lying beyond the Exclusive Economic Zone.
8. The Private Sea Zone:

Includes the Mediterranean and Red Sea areas according to the
geographical and natural boundaries as determined in Rule (10) of
Annex (1) of the (Maripool) Convention for 1973-1978. 
4
Chapter II
The Environmental Affairs Agency
Article (2)
The Environmental Affairs Agency (EEAA) established by Law No. 4 of 1994
shall replace the agency established by Presidential Decree No. 631 of 1982 in
all its rights and obligations, and the employees of the said agency shall be
transferred with their grades and seniority to the EEAA and assigned in such
capacity to the administrative sectors of the EEAA by a decree issued by its
CEO.
Article (3)
The Board of Directors of the Environmental Affairs Agency shall be constituted
pursuant to a decree issued by the Prime Minister. The Board shall be chaired
by the Minister for Environmental Affairs and shall include the following
members:
* The CEO of the Agency, who shall be the deputy chairman of the Board.
* At least one high-ranking representative, to be designated by the
competent minister, from each of the following six ministries: Agriculture,
Animal and Fish Resources and Agrarian Reform; Public Works and
Water Resources; Transport and Communications; Industry; Interior and
Health.
* Two experts in the field of environmental affairs selected by the Minister
for Environmental Affairs on the basis of a proposal from the CEO of the
Agency.
* Three non-governmental organizations concerned with the environment
to be selected from among the candidates of these organizations to
represent them on the Board of Directors, in agreement with the Minister
for Environmental Affairs.
* A senior employee of the EEAA selected by the Minister for
Environmental Affairs on the basis of a proposal by the CEO of the
Agency.
* The director of the Legal Opinions Department concerned at the Council
of State.
* Three representatives from among the candidates put forward by the
public business sector selected by the Minister for Environmental Affairs,
on the basis of the nomination of the CEO of the Agency. 
5
* Two representatives from universities and scientific research centers
selected by the Minister for Environmental Affairs from among the
candidates put forward by the said bodies.
The representatives of the ministries concerned must be invited to attend Board
meetings whenever subjects related to the sectors under their supervision are
tabled for discussion. The Board may solicit the assistance of experts when
considering specific issues, with no right for such experts to have a counted
vote in the deliberations. The Board of Directors may form advisory committees
of experts to study certain subjects and entrust one or more of the members of
such committees with a specific task.
The secretariat of the Board of Directors shall be held by the Secretary General
of the EEAA who shall not have a counted vote in the deliberations unless he
was selected as a member of the Board of Directors. The Board of Directors
shall be reconstituted every three years.
Article (4)

The EEAA Board of Directors is the supreme authority governing its affairs,
running its business and drawing up the general policy it will follow. The Board
may adopt whatever resolutions it deems necessary for the fulfillment of the
objects for which the EEAA was established, within the framework of the
national plan. It shall in particular have the authority to:
* Approve national plans for the protection of the environment.
* Approve contingency plans to deal with environmental disasters.
* Prepare draft laws concerning the environment.
* Approve experimental projects undertaken by the EEAA.
* Approve environmental training policies and plans.
* Approve the levels and ratios necessary to ensure the non pollution of
the environment.
* Approve standards and procedures for assessing the environmental
impact of projects.
* Supervise the Fund for the Protection and Development of the
Environment.
* Approve the organizational structure of the EEAA and its branches in the
governorates.
* Approve the by-laws and personnel regulations of the EEAA.
* Approve the EEAA draft annual budget. 
6
* Consider all matters which the Chairman of the Board deems worthy to
be presented to it and which lie within the EEAA scope of competence.
* Determine which of its resolutions should be submitted to the Cabinet for
a decision. In all cases, the Board of Directors shall be held to include
with its resolutions, particularly those it decides to submit to the Cabinet,
a study on the costs of implementing such resolutions and the expected
results ensued.
Article (5)
The CEO of the Agency shall be responsible for implementing the general
policy adopted to fulfill its objects and the resolutions of the Board of Directors.
His responsibilities include:
- Exercising ministerial powers as prescribed in laws and regulations in
respect of EEAA staff.
- Exercising ministerial powers as prescribed in various laws and
regulations related to the management of the EEAA business, the
running of its technical, financial and administrative affairs and the
fulfillment of its objects.
- Exercising ministerial powers in the area of applying the provisions of
Law No. 9 of 1983 promulgating the Law on Tenders and Auctions and
its Executive Regulations.
- Developing the system of work in the EEAA, consolidating its
departments and issuing the necessary resolutions to that end.
- Obtaining data and information related to the Agency objectives from
various governmental and non-governmental bodies concerned both
inside and outside the country.
- Ensuring the application of the provisions of the Environment Law and
these Executive Regulations in agreement, coordination and cooperation
with other legally competent establishments.
Article (6)
The EEAA shall have an organizational structure issued by a decision from its
CEO with the approval of the Board of Directors and in agreement with the
Central Agency for Organization and Administration and the Ministry of Finance. 
7
Chapter III
The Environment Protection Fund

Article (7)
A special fund shall be established in the EEAA under the name
"the Environment Protection Fund" to which shall devolve:
a. Amounts allocated in the state budget to subsidize the
fund.
b. Grants and donations presented by national and foreign
organizations for the purpose of protecting and promoting
the environment and which are accepted by the Board of
Directors of the EEAA.
c. Fines levied and damages awarded or agreed upon for any
harm caused to the environment.
d. The financial resources of the Nature Reserves Fund
provided for in Law 102 of 1983.
e. The EEAA share in the 25% of the proceeds of duties
imposed on travel tickets issued in Egypt in Egyptian
currency, pursuant to Article 1 of Law 5 of 1986 and to the
Prime Minister's Decree No. 697 of 1986, to a minimum of
12.5% of the total proceeds of the abovementioned duties.
f. The returns from experimental projects undertaken by the
EEAA.
g. Amounts collected by the EEAA for services rendered to
third parties.
h. Fees for licenses issued by the EEAA.

Amounts collected on a temporary basis on account of fines and
compensation for damage caused to the environment shall be
deposited in the Fund and held in trust.

The Fund shall have a special balance sheet and its fiscal year
shall commence and end with that of the state. Any surplus shall
be carried over from one year to the next. The money in the Fund
is deemed to be public money.
Article (8)
8
The resources of the Fund shall be allocated to the fulfillment of its objects, in
particular to:
* Confronting environmental disasters.
* Experimental and pioneering projects in the field of protecting natural
wealth and the environment from pollution.
* Transfer of low cost technologies whose application has proved to be
successful.
* Financing the manufacture of model equipment, machinery and plants for
the treatment of environmental pollutants.
* Establishing and operating Environmental Monitoring Networks.
* Establishing and administering Nature Reserves in order to preserve
natural wealth and resources.
* Confronting pollution from unknown sources.
* Financing the studies required to prepare environmental programmes,
assessing environmental impact and determining the standards and
criteria that must be observed in order to protect the environment.
* Participating in financing environmental protection projects undertaken
by local administrative agencies and grass-roots organizations which are
partly financed through popular participation.
* Projects to combat pollution.
* Disbursing bonuses for outstanding achievements in the area of
protecting the environment.
* Consolidating the EEAA basic structure and developing its activities.
* Other objects aimed at protecting and developing the environment which
are approved by the EEAA Board of Directors.
Chapter IV
Incentives
Article (9)
Within six months from the date these Executive Regulations come into force,
the EEAA shall, in collaboration with the Ministry of Finance, lay down a system
of incentives which the EEAA and competent administrative bodies may offer to
agencies, establishments, individuals and others who undertake activities or
projects that protect the environment, provided due consideration is given when
laying down such system to the privileges and conditions prescribed in laws and 
9
decrees, particularly to those related to investments, customs, industry,
cooperatives and others.
PART ONE
PROTECTING LAND ENVIRONMENT FROM POLLUTION
Chapter I
Development and the Environment
Article (10)
The competent administrative body or the licensing authority shall assess the
environmental impact of the establishment applying for a license in accordance
with the elements, designs, specifications and conditions issued by the EEAA in
agreement with the competent administrative body. The EEAA shall revise its
assessment whenever necessary.
Article (11)
The provisions of Article (10) of these Executive Regulations shall apply to the
establishments listed in Annex (2) of these Executive Regulations.
Article (12)
The applicant for a license shall be held to attach to the application a detailed
description of the establishment containing the data included in the model form
prepared by the EEAA in agreement with the competent administrative body.
The EEAA shall prepare a register comprising copies of this model form and the
assessment results, as well as the requests made by the EEAA to the owner of
the establishment.
Article (13)
The EEAA may resort to any experts whose names are included in a list to be
issued by the EEAA in accordance with the criteria set by the EEAA Board of
Directors, in order to get their opinion on the assessment of the environmental
impact of the establishment intended to be constructed and for which a license
is being sought. 
10
Article (14)
The competent administrative body shall notify the establishment owner of the
assessment result by registered letter with return receipt requested. The owner
is entitled to object to such result in writing within a period of thirty days from the
date of his notification before the Permanent Review Committee to be formed
by a decree of the Minister for Environmental Affairs. The said Committee shall
be chaired by a counselor from the Council of State and shall include the
following members:
- A representative from the EEAA nominated by its CEO.
- The owner of the or whoever represents him by virtue of an official power
of attorney.
- A representative of the competent body or of the licensing authority when
it is not the competent body.
- Three experts to be selected as members of the Committee for a term of
three years on the basis of their nomination by the Agency CEO.
The Committee may form sub-committees from among its members and others
to study the objections referred to them and present reports thereon to the
Committee. In performing its tasks, the Committee may solicit assistance from
any quarter at its discretion, and shall be held to issue its decision within sixty
days from the date of receiving the completed objection documents.
Article (15)
The Permanent Review Committee referred to in Article (14) above shall be
competent to look into the objections submitted or referred to it in connection
with assessment results or with the proposals which the EEAA requires to be
executed, and shall formulate its opinion on such objections by reference to the
standards prescribed in Article (10) of these Executive Regulations. Objections
shall be submitted in writing to the EEAA and shall include the reasons for the
objection and the legal and scientific grounds on which the project owner
substantiates his objection. The latter shall also attach thereto such documents
as it deems necessary to support the reasons for his objection.
Article (16)
The Committee shall convene at the invitation of the Agency CEO within fifteen
days from the date the Agency receives the written objection. A representative
from the Agency, delegated by the CEO, shall take minutes of the meeting
without having a counted vote in the discussions. The Committee decision shall
be issued by a simple majority of votes, and the minutes shall be signed by all
attending members. 
11
Article (17)
 The establishment owner shall, pursuant to the provisions of these Executive
Regulations, keep a register indicating the environmental impact of the
establishment activities in which the following data shall be recorded:
- Emissions put out thereby or discharged therefrom.
- Specifications of discharges after the treatment process, and the
efficiency of the treatment units used.
- Follow-up and environmental safety procedures applied in the
establishment.
- Periodical tests and measures and their results.
- The name of the person in charge of follow-up.
The said register shall be prepared in accordance with the model form shown in
Annex (3) hereto.
The establishment owner or his representative shall be held to notify the EEAA
immediately, by means of registered letter with return receipt requested, of any
deviation in the criteria and specifications of emitted or discharged pollutants
and the procedures taken to rectify such deviations.
Article (18)
The EEAA shall be competent to follow-up the data recorded in the register to
ascertain its conformity with the facts, as well as to take the necessary samples
and conduct the appropriate tests to determine the environmental impact of the
establishment activity and the extent of its adherence to the criteria laid down
for the protection of the environment.
Such follow-up shall be regularly conducted every year and a report thereon
deposited with the competent department in the EEAA. The report shall be
signed by the officer in charge of follow-up and tests and shall indicate the date
on which the follow-up was conducted. If any violations are discovered, the
EEAA shall notify the competent administrative body which shall instruct the
establishment owner, by means of a registered letter with return receipt
requested, to rectify such violations forthwith in accordance with the proper
rules of trade. If he fails to do so within 60 days, the CEO, in co-ordination with
the competent administrative body, shall be entitled to take the following
procedures: 
12
1. Close down the establishment.
2. Suspend the contravening activity.
3. Claim adequate compensation through the courts to remedy the damage
resulting from the violation.
Establishments shall permanently keep the registers duly completed according
to the model form referred to in Article (17) hereof, . When entries are updated,
the establishment shall be held to maintain the register for a period of ten years
calculated from the date of the EEAA representative's signature thereon
attesting to its review.
Article (19)
Expansions or renovations of an existing establishment are subject to the same
provisions prescribed in Articles (19), (20), (21) and (22) of the Environment
Law.
Any change in the production patterns of the operating machines or increase in
the size of the manpower beyond the capacity of the work place or any
essential modifications to the establishment buildings, particularly those related
to the ventilation system or the relocation of the work premises or other similar
modifications which may have a harmful effect on the environment or on the
employees of the establishment, are considered expansions and renovations.
Article (20)
The existing Environmental Monitoring Networks, including the stations, shall be
considered as work units administratively subordinate to their competent bodies
and shall, within the scope of their competence, undertake to periodically
monitor environmental components and pollutants and furnish the relevant data
to the bodies concerned. To that end, they may resort to the help of research
centers and competent bodies and agencies which shall be held to provide the
Networks with the requested data and studies. The EEAA shall supervise the
establishment and operation of the Environmental Monitoring Networks
preliminary to setting up a national programme for environmental monitoring.
Article (21)
The EEAA shall, in cooperation with ministries, governorates, general
authorities and other bodies concerned, lay down an emergency plan to
confront environmental disasters which shall be approved by the Cabinet. The
plan shall be based in particular on the factors indicated in the following phases:
(A) Phase prior to the occurrence of the disaster:
13
- Determining the types of environmental disasters and the areas most
affected by them and identifying the expected impact of each type.
- Collecting information available locally and internationally on how to deal
with environmental disasters and on the means of alleviating the damage
resulting therefrom.
- Compiling a list of the resources available at the local, national and
international levels and determining the optimal manner in which they
can be deployed to deal promptly with the disaster.
- Determining the bodies responsible for reporting actual or impending
disasters.
- Laying down the procedures appropriate for each type of disaster.
- Establishing a central operations room to receive reports on
environmental disasters and follow-up the receipt and dispatch of
accurate information thereon to mobilize the necessary resources so as
to confront such disasters.
- Supervising, training and following up disaster-management teams at all
levels.
- Facilitating the system and means of exchanging information between
the various bodies on matters relating to disasters, and ensuring the
efficiency of the system.
- Determining the means of exchange of and requests for assistance
between the various bodies when managing a crisis and establishing the
appropriate data bases.
(B) Phase when disaster is at its peak:
- Forming a task group to follow-up the confrontation of the environmental
disaster upon its occurrence.
- Implementing the plans set for coordination and cooperation at the local,
regional and central levels to ensure the uninterrupted flow of equipment
and supplies to the disaster area.
- Realizing the optimum utilization of actual resources available to various
organizations in dealing with the disaster.
- Specifying what each organization needs from the other organizations in
the light of the evolution of the disaster.
- Determining the means of informing citizens of the disaster, its evolution
and the means of dealing with its effects. 
14
 (C) Phase of removing the effects of the disaster
- Determining the manner of participation by various organizations in
removing the effects of the disaster.
- Developing plans aimed at enhancing performance.
- Raising public awareness of the means for dealing with disasters.
(D) Phase of recording the results of the disaster and the lessons
drawn therefrom:
- Recording the economic and social effects resulting from the occurrence
of the disaster.
- Recording the lessons drawn from dealing with each disaster.
- Advancing proposals for the avoidance in future of shortcomings and
deficiencies discovered during the confrontation.
Article (22)
The operation room referred to in Article (21) of these Executive Regulations
shall form a work group to confront an environmental disaster upon its
occurrence or at the time it is expected to occur. The work group shall include
representatives from the various bodies concerned, and its head shall have all
the powers necessary to confront the environmental disaster, in cooperation
with the competent bodies.
Article (23)
All methods of hunting, killing or catching the birds and wild animals referred to
in Annex (4) of these Executive Regulations are prohibited. It is also forbidden
to possess, transport, circulate with, sell or offer to sell such birds and animals,
either dead or alive, or to destroy the nests or eggs of the birds. The provisions
of this Article shall apply to all Nature Reserves as well as to areas where
animals and birds are threatened with extinction, as designated in a decree to
be issued by the Minister of Agricultural or the governors in coordination with
the EEAA. 
15
Article (24)
It is forbidden to issue licenses for the hunting of the birds and wild animals
referred to in Annex (4) hereof except for purposes of scientific research,
overcoming an epidemic or for such other purposes as are approved by the
EEAA. The application for a license shall be submitted in writing to the Ministry
of Interior, indicating the species and number of birds or wild animals for which
the hunting license is required, the purpose for which they will be hunted, the
hunting period, the names of the person or persons to be licensed, and the
method and weapons to be used in hunting. The said Ministry shall refer the
application to the EEAA in order to ascertain its seriousness and importance.
Chapter II
Hazardous Substances and Waste
Article (25)
It is forbidden to displace and use hazardous substances and waste without a
license from the competent authority indicated for each as hereinbelow:
1. Hazardous agricultural substances and waste, including pesticides and
fertilizers - Ministry of Agriculture.
2. Hazardous industrial substances and waste - Ministry of Industry.
3. Hazardous pharmaceutical, hospital and laboratory substances and
waste and domestic insecticides - Ministry of Health.
4. Hazardous petroleum substances and waste - Ministry of Petroleum.
5. Hazardous substances and waste from which ionizing radiation is
emitted - Ministry of Electricity - Nuclear Energy Authority.
6. Hazardous inflammable and explosive substances and waste - Ministry
of Interior.
7. In respect of other hazardous substances and waste, the respective
bodies competent to issue a license for their displacement shall be
designated by a decree of the Minister for Environmental Affairs on the
basis of a proposal by the CEO of the EEAS
The ministers heading the ministries mentioned in this Article shall, each within
his scope of competence and in coordination with the Minister of Health and the
EEAA, issue a table of hazardous substances and waste specifying:
A. The types of hazardous substances and waste falling within his ministry
scope of competence and their respective degrees of danger. 
16
B. The constraints to be observed in the displacement of each.
C. The means of disposing of the empty containers of such substances after
their displacement.
D. Any other constraints or conditions the minister deems important to add.
Article (26)
The applicant for a license shall submit his application in writing to the
competent authority as defined in Article (25) of these Executive Regulations in
accordance with the following procedures and conditions:
Procedures for granting a license:
The license to handle hazardous substances and waste shall have a maximum
validity period of five years unless an event entailing its review occurs. The
competent administrative authority may, pursuant to the provisions of Article
(40) hereof, grant temporary licenses for short periods as necessity dictates.
The body or individual wishing to obtain a license for the displacement of
hazardous substances or waste shall submit an application containing the
following data:
1- Handler of hazardous substances and waste:
- Name of establishment
- Address and telephone No.
- Site and area of establishment
- Contour maps of the site
- Level of underground water
- Safety equipment in the establishment
- Information concerning insurance
- Programme for monitoring the environment in the area surrounding
 the establishment
2- Producer of hazardous substances and waste (full name, address,
telephone and fax numbers).
3- A complete description of the hazardous substances and waste intended
to be handled and the nature and concentration of the dangerous
elements contained therein.
4- The amount of hazardous substances and waste intended to be handled
annually and a description of the method of packing to be used (barrels -
tanks - loose). 
17
5- The means to be used in storing hazardous substances and waste and
the storage period for each, as well as an undertaking to place a clear
written description on the container indicating its contents, the degree of
danger thereof and how to act in an emergency.
6- The available means of transport (by land - rail - sea - air - internal
waterways), their routings and schedules.
7- A complete statement of the method intended to be used for the
treatment and disposal of the hazardous substances and waste for the
displacement of which a license is sought.
8- A commitment not to mix hazardous substances and waste with any
other type of waste produced by social and production activities.
9- A commitment to keep registers containing detailed accounts of the
sources, quantities and types of hazardous substances and waste, the
rates and periods of their collection and storage and the means of their
transport and treatment, to furnish such data on request, and not to
destroy the registers for a period of five years running from the date they
are first opened.
10- A commitment to take all procedures as are necessary to ensure the
proper packing of hazardous substances and waste during the collection,
transportation and storage phases.
11- A detailed description of the emergency plan for confronting all
unforeseen circumstances which guarantees the protection of human
beings and the environment.
12- A certificate of previous experience in the field of handling hazardous
substances and waste.
13- A declaration of the veracity of data stated in such document.
Conditions for granting a license:
1- Completion of all required data.
2- Availability of personnel trained in the handling of hazardous substances
and waste.
3- Availability of means, resources and systems required for the safe
handling of these substances.
4- Availability of requirements to confront the risks which may result from
accidents occurring during the handling of these substances. 
18
5- That no harmful effects to the environment and public health shall result
from the activity for which a license is sought.
Article (27)
The license to handle hazardous substances and waste shall be issued in
consideration of a cash payment to be determined by a decree from the
competent minister. The license shall be valid for a maximum period of five
years subject to renewal.
The licensing authority may revoke the license or suspend the activity by a
reasoned decision in the following cases:
1- If the license was issued as a result (of the submission) of incorrect data.
2- If the license violates the conditions of the license.
3- If the performance of the activity results in dangerous environmental
effects which were unforeseen at the time the license was issued.
4- The emergence of sophisticated technology which may, with minor
modifications, be applied, and the use of which would lead to a marked
improvement in the environment and the health of the workers.
5- If the EEAA concludes that it is unsafe to handle any of the substances
and wastes.
The licensing authority in coordination with the EEAA and the Ministry of Health
may request the applicant to fulfill such other conditions as it deems necessary
to ensure the safe handling of these substances,. In all cases, the applicant for
a license may not handle hazardous substances and waste before obtaining the
license made out on the relevant form which must be kept by the person in
charge of the handling to be presented on request.
Article (28)
The management of hazardous wastes shall be subject to the following rules
and procedures: 
19
1- Engendering Hazardous Waste:
The establishment which engenders hazardous waste shall be held to do
the following:
A- Try hard to reduce the rate at which such waste is produced, both
quantitatively and qualitatively, by developing the technology
used, employing clean technology and selecting alternatives for
the primary product or the raw material which are less harmful to
the environment and public health.
B- Categorize the waste produced, in terms of both quantity and
quality, and register same.
C- Establish and operate units to treat waste at source, provided the
EEAA approves the treatment system as well as the technical
specifications of these units and their operational programmes. In
case of difficulty of treatment or disposal of hazardous waste at
source, the establishment producing such waste shall be held to
collect and transport it to the disposal sites determined by the
local authorities and the competent administrative and
environmental bodies. The displacement of such waste shall be
subject to all the conditions and provisions prescribed in this
respect by these Executive Regulations.
2- Stage of Collecting and Storing Hazardous Waste:
A- Determine specific locations for the storage of hazardous waste
meeting safety conditions to prevent the occurrence of any harm
to the public or to those persons exposed to such waste.
B- Store hazardous waste in special containers made of a solid, nonporous, leak-proof material. These containers are to be
hermetically sealed and their capacity must be commensurate
with the quantity of hazardous waste stored therein or conform to
the standards set for the storage of such waste according to type.
C- Place a clear sign on the hazardous waste containers indicating
their contents and warning of the dangers which may result from
handling them imprudently.
D- Lay down a schedule for the collection of hazardous waste so that
it is not left for long periods in the storage containers.
E- Producers of hazardous waste shall be held to provide the abovementioned containers, wash them after each use and not place
them in public places.
3- Stage of Transporting Hazardous Waste: 
20
A- It is prohibited to transport hazardous waste by other than the
means of transport run by the establishments licensed to manage
hazardous waste. Those means of transport must meet the
following conditions:
1- Transport trucks shall be fitted with all safety equipment
and shall be in good working condition.
2- The capacity of such trucks and their shift schedule shall be
commensurate with the quantities of hazardous waste.
3- They shall be driven by trained drivers capable of taking
independent initiatives, particularly in emergencies.
4- They shall bear clear signs indicating the dangerous nature
of their cargo and the best manner of dealing with
emergencies.
B- Routing of trucks transporting hazardous waste shall be
determined and civil defense bodies shall be immediately notified
of any changes therein, so as to enable them to act rapidly and
decisively in emergencies.
C- Trucks transporting hazardous waste shall be prohibited from
passing through residential and other populated areas and
through the city centre during daytime.
D- The address of the garages where hazardous waste trucks are
parked, as well as the number and date of their license, must be
notified to the competent authority.
E- Trucks transporting hazardous waste must be washed and
sterilized after each use in accordance with the directives issued
by the Ministry of Health in coordination with the competent
administrative body designated in Article (40) of these Executive
Regulations.
4- The following must be observed when authorizing the passage of ships
carrying hazardous waste:
A- Prior notification is a requisite. The competent administrative body
shall be entitled to withhold authorization if there is a risk of
environmental pollution.
B- In case of authorization, all necessary precautions as prescribed
in international conventions must be taken, and the ship must
have the guarantee certificate referred to in Law No. 4 of 1994. 
21
5- Stage of Treatment and Disposal of Hazardous Waste:
A- The sites selected to house utilities for the treatment and disposal
of hazardous waste shall lie at a distance of at least three
kilometres from populated and residential areas, and shall be held
to meet the conditions and provide the equipment and installations
set forth below:
1- The area of the site must be proportionate to the quantity of
hazardous waste so that such waste does not remain in
storage for extended periods.
2- The site shall be encircled with a brick wall standing at least
2.5 meters high.
3- The site shall be provided with more than one gate of
suitable width, allowing the easy entry of trucks transporting
hazardous waste.
4- The site shall be provided with a water source and W.C.
facilities.
5- The site shall be provided with all the protection and safety
requirements prescribed in labour and vocational health
laws, as well as with a telephone line.
6- The site shall be provided with all the mechanical
equipment which can facilitate the work process.
7- The site shall be provided with warehouses equipped to
preserve hazardous waste pending its treatment and
disposal. Equipment shall differ according to the type of
hazardous waste received by each utility.
8- The utility shall be provided with an incinerator for burning
certain type of hazardous waste.
9- The utility shall be provided with the necessary equipment
and installations for sorting and classifying certain types of
hazardous waste with the intention of reutilizing and
recycling them.
10- The site shall have a sanitary ditch of an adequate capacity
for burying the incinerated remains.
B- Processes for the treatment of hazardous waste which may be
reused and recycled shall be carried out within the following
framework:
1- Reutilization of some hazardous waste as fuel to generate
energy. 
22
2- Recovery of organic solvents and their reutilization in
extraction processes.
3- Recycling and reusing some organic substances from
hazardous waste.
4- Reusing ferrous and non-ferrous metals and their
compounds.
5- Recycling and reusing certain non-organic substances from
hazardous waste.
6- Recovery and recycling of acids or alkalines.
7- Recovery of substances used in reducing pollution.
8- Recovery of certain components of ancillary elements.
9- Recovery of used oil and reutilizing it after its refinement,
with due consideration to the relationship between
environmental and economic returns.
C- Processes for the treatment of hazardous waste which cannot be
reutilized and recycled shall be carried out within the following
framework:
1- Injecting hazardous waste amenable to pumping into salt
mines, wells and natural reservoirs in areas far from
residential and populated areas.
2- Burying hazardous waste in pits specially prepared for this
purpose and isolated from the other components of the
environmental system.
3- Treating hazardous waste biologically by using certain
types of living micro-organisms to bring about its
decomposition.
4- Treating hazardous waste physically or chemically by
evaporation, dilution, calcification, assimilation,
sedimentation, etc.
5- Incineration in special incinerators designed to prevent the
emission of gases and fumes into the surrounding
environment.
6- Permanent storage (such as placing hazardous waste
containers inside a mine). 
23
D- Taking all procedures which guarantee limiting and reducing the
production of hazardous waste through:
1- Developing and generalizing the use of clean technology.
2- Developing suitable systems for the management of
hazardous waste.
3- Expanding the reutilization and recycling of hazardous
waste after treatment whenever possible.
E- Setting a periodic programme to monitor the various components
of the environmental system (organic and non-organic) in the sites
of utilities and their surroundings for the treatment and disposal of
hazardous waste. Licenses shall be withdrawn and work in the
utility suspended upon the appearance of any indications of
damage to the eco-systems surrounding the utility.
F- Establishments licensed to handle and manage hazardous
substances and waste shall be responsible for any damage
caused to third parties as a result of non-compliance with the
provisions of these Executive Regulations.
The EEAA shall be competent to review the hazardous waste
schedules, which are subject to the provisions of the Law, with the
cooperation of the ministries concerned in regard to the schedules
issued by them in this connection.
Article (29)
It is prohibited to construct any establishment for the purpose of treating
hazardous waste except with a license issued by the competent governorate
after consulting the EEAA, the Ministry of Health, the Ministry of Labour and
Manpower, and the ministry concerned with the type of waste according to the
provisions of Article (25) of these Executive Regulations, after ensuring that
such establishment satisfies all the conditions which guarantee the safety of the
environment and the staff employed thereat.
Disposal of hazardous waste shall be effected in accordance with the conditions
and criteria prescribed in Article (28) of these Executive Regulations.
The Minister of Housing, after consulting the ministries of Health and Industry
and the EEAA, shall determine the locations and conditions for the disposal of
hazardous waste.
Article (30)
It is prohibited to import hazardous waste or to allow its entry into or passage
through the territory of the Arab Republic of Egypt. 
24
It is prohibited, without a license from the competent administrative department
in the Ministry of Maritime Transport or in the Suez Canal Authority, each within
the scope of its competence, to allow the passage of ships carrying hazardous
waste, in the Territorial Sea or the Exclusive Economic Zone of the Arab
Republic of Egypt, provided the EEAA is notified withal.
Article (31)
Those in charge of the production or displacement of hazardous substances,
whether in their gaseous, liquid or solid states, shall take all due precautions to
ensure the non occurrence of any environmental damage, and shall be held in
particular to observe the following:
(A) That the site on which such substances are to be produced or stored is
selected with due regard to the conditions prescribed according to the
type and quantity of those substances.
(B) That the design of the buildings inside which hazardous substances are
to be produced or stored conforms to the engineering standards to be
observed for each type of such substances, as determined by a decree
to be issued by the Minister of Housing after consulting the EEAA. The
said buildings shall be subject to periodic inspections by the licensing
administrative body.
(C) That the conditions prescribed in respect of the means of transport or the
storage sites of such substances are provided so as to guarantee that no
harm shall come to the environment or to the health of employees or
citizens.
(D) That the technology and equipment used in the production of such
substances shall not result in damage to the establishment, the
environment or harm to the staff.
(E) That buildings shall be adequately fitted out with safety, alarm,
protection, combat, fire-fighting and first aid systems and equipment, in
the numbers and quantities determined by the Minister of Labour and
Manpower after consulting the EEAA, the Ministry of Health and the Civil
Defense Department in coordination with the competent administrative
authority.
(F) That an emergency plan is in place to confront any potential accidents
which may occur during the production, storage, transportation or
handling of such substances, provided the plan is reviewed and
approved by the licensing authority after consulting the EEAA and the
Civil Defense Department.
(G) That staff in these establishments are subjected to periodic medical
checkups and that they are treated for any vocational diseases at the
expense of the establishment by which they are employed. 
25
(H) That establishments producing hazardous substances insure their
workers for the amounts to be determined by a decree from the Minister
of Manpower in coordination with the Ministry of Insurance and Social
Affairs, after consulting the EEAA and the Ministry of Health, provided
the amounts of the insurance take into account the degree of danger to
which each category of workers is exposed inside each productive unit.
(I) That workers handling such substances are informed of the dangers
involved and of the necessary precautions to be taken when handling
them, that they are fully aware of all this information and that they have
received adequate training in this regard.
(J) That the inhabitants of the regions surrounding the sites where
hazardous substances are produced or handled are informed of the
possible dangers of these substances and the method of facing such
dangers, and that they are familiar with the alarm systems to be used in
case of an accident and with the procedures to be followed on its
occurrence.
(K) Establishments producing and handling hazardous substances are held
to compensate citizens injured in the locations surrounding the
production or storage sites for injuries caused by accidents resulting from
these activities or from harmful emissions or leakages therefrom. Those
assigned to the production and handling of hazardous substances shall
submit an annual report on the extent of their commitment in
implementing the necessary precautions.
Article (32)
Establishments engaged in the production or importation of hazardous
substances shall, when producing or importing such substances, observe the
following conditions: 
26
Firstly: Container specifications:
(A) The type of container in which these substances are placed must be
suitable for the type of substance therein, tightly closed and difficult to
damage.
(B) The capacity of the container must be easy to lift or transportation
without exposing it to damage or harm.
(C) The inner lining of the container must be made of a material that is not
affected by storage throughout the period when the substances
contained therein are active.
Secondly: Container information:
(A) Contents of container, their active substance, and the degree of its
concentration.
(B) Total and net weight.
(C) Name of producer, date of production and production number.
(D) Nature of danger and symptoms of toxicity.
(E) First aid procedures to be taken in case of exposure.
(F) Safe method of opening, emptying and using container.
(G) Safe storage method.
(H) Methods of disposal of empty containers.
All the information shall be written in Arabic in a style that is easy for an ordinary
person to read and understand, and the words must be legible and prominently
displayed on the container. They must be accompanied by diagrams indicating
the method of opening, emptying, storing and disposing of the containers as
well as by the international symbols for danger and toxicity.
Article (33)
The owner of an establishment whose activity results in hazardous waste
pursuant to the provisions of these Executive Regulations shall be held to keep
a register of such waste and the method of its disposal, as well as of the names
of the parties contracted with to receive the said waste, as follows:
1) Name and address of the establishment.
2) Name and job title of the person responsible for filling in the register.
3) The period covered by the current data. 
27
4) The special conditions issued for the establishment by the EEAA.
5) A list of the types and quantities of hazardous waste resulting from the
establishment activity.
6) Method of disposal thereof.
7) The parties contracted with to receive the hazardous waste.
8) Date on which the form is filled.
9) Signature of the officer in charge.
The EEAA shall follow up the information in the register to ensure its conformity
with reality.
PART TWO
PROTECTION OF AIR ENVIRONMENT FROM POLLUTION
Article (34)
Without prejudice to the provisions of Articles (10) and (11) of these Executive
Regulations, the site on which a project is established must be suitable for the
establishment activity in regard to its conformity with the zoning requirements of
the area and its compliance with the plan set for the use of the land by the
Ministry of New Urban Communities, and the total amount of pollution emitted
by all the establishments in any one area must be within the permissible levels
as indicated in Annex (5) of these Executive Regulations.
In all cases, due consideration shall be given when determining the suitability of
the site to the prevailing wind direction and its distance from habitation, whether
in the area of the project or the surrounding areas.
Article (35)
All the establishments listed in Annex (2) of these Executive Regulations for
which an assessment of environmental impact is required prior to their being
licensed to exercise their activity shall be subject to the provisions of the
preceding Article. The license confirming the suitability of the site shall be
issued by the body competent to assess the environmental impact of such
activity after referring to the EEAA in this regard. 
28
Article (36)
In carrying out their activities, establishments subject to the provisions of this
Law are held to ensure that emissions or leakages of air pollutants do not
exceed the maximum limits permitted by laws and decrees in force and
determined in Annex (6) of these Executive Regulations, and that no changes
are introduced to the properties and specifications of natural air that can result
in endangering human health and the environment.
Article (37)
It is prohibited to use machines, engines or vehicles which emit exhaust whose
contents exceed the following maximum limits:
1. Vehicles currently in service:
CARBON MONOXIDE: 7% in volume at the speed of (600-900
R.P.M.)
UNBURNED HYDROCARBONS: 1000 parts in a million, at the speed of (600-
900 R.P.M.)
SMOKES 65% degree of opacity or the equivalent in
other units, at minimum acceleration
2. New vehicles licensed as of 1995:
CARBON MONOXIDE: 4.5% in volume at the speed of (600-900
R.P.M.)
UNBURNED HYDROCARBONS: 900 parts in a million, at the speed of (600-
900 R.P.M.)
SMOKES 50% degree of opacity or the equivalent in
other units, at maximum acceleration.
The provisions of this Article shall apply in the governorates to be determined
by a decree of the Minister of Interior, provided the decree shall allow a period
not exceeding one year for commencement of implementation to enable the
owners of these machines, engines, and vehicles to adjust them in accordance
with the provisions of this Article.
The EEAA, in coordination with the Ministry of Interior, the Ministry of Industry,
the Ministry of Health and the Ministry of Petroleum, may reconsider the
maximum limits prescribed in this Article three years after the publication date of
these Executive Regulations.
Article (38)
29
It is prohibited to dump, treat or burn garbage and solid waste - other than
infectious waste left over from medical care in hospitals and health centers -
except in special sites, designated for such purpose, far from inhabited,
industrial or agricultural areas as well as from waterways, in accordance with
the specifications, conditions and minimum permissible distances from such
areas as indicated hereunder:
(1) It is strictly forbidden to burn any waste other than the infectious waste
referred to in para 1 of this Article in residential or industrial areas and
such waste shall be incinerated in special incinerators having the
following specifications:
(A) They shall be downwind in the populated areas.
(B) They shall be at a distance of at least 1500 meters from the
nearest residential area.
(C) The capacity of the incinerator or incinerators shall be adequate to
burn the garbage transported thereto within 24 hours.
(D) The incinerator shall be sited in a place with an adequate space to
receive the expected garbage according to the nature of activities
in the urban area and the number of its inhabitants.
(2) In case of extreme necessity, and within a transition period not
exceeding three years from the date of publication of these Executive
Regulations, garbage shall be allowed to be burned uncovered, subject
to the following conditions:
(A) With a prior permit from the EEAA and the Civil Defense
Department, incineration shall be carried out under the
supervision of both the municipal authority units and the Civil
Defense Department.
(B) That the place where the garbage is incinerated stands at a
minimum distance of 1.5 kilometers from populated, industrial and
downwind areas.
(C) The municipal authorities shall allocate a site to receive the
garbage after carrying out an integrated study on the topography
and nature of the area, and the quantity of waste requiring to be
disposed of every 24 hours, which site shall be:
- At a lower contour level than the surrounding area.
- Of an area adequate for storing the garbage intended to be
transported and for carrying out other operations normally
effected on the site, such as sorting and any other related
operations.
- Supplied with a water source for emergency cases and
other necessary uses. 
30
- Supplied with the necessary equipment for storing, sifting
and disposing of ashes by burying them so that they will not
be dispersed in the air or leak into the underground water.
(3) Infectious waste from hospitals and health centres shall be burned on
site in incinerators especially designed for that purpose and capable of
absorbing the collected quantities without congestion or storing near the
incinerator. In case of necessity, and with the approval of the competent
municipal authorities and the EEAA, the waste of such units may be
transported to the nearest hospital equipped with one or more
incinerators, provided they can absorb the waste transported thereto.
Such waste is transported in sealed containers which do not allow the
dispersal of their contents in the air and the containers are incinerated
together with their contents.
(4) In all cases, the incinerators shall be fitted with adequate technical
methods to prevent the dispersal of ashes or the emission of gases
except within the permissible limits as prescribed in Annex (6) of these
Executive Regulations.
(5) Municipal authorities shall, in agreement with the EEAA, allocate sites
where solid garbage shall be dumped, treated or incinerated according to
the provisions of this Article.
Article (39)
Collectors of garbage and solid waste shall be held to maintain the cleanliness
of garbage bins and vehicles, the continual cleanliness of which shall be one of
the conditions set to ensure the safety and solidity of garbage transport means.
Garbage collection bins shall be tightly covered to prevent them from giving off
offensive odours or from becoming a source for the proliferation of flies and
other insects or a focus of attraction for stray animals. The garbage they contain
shall be collected and transported at suitable intervals in keeping with the
conditions of each area, provided the quantity of garbage at any one time in any
of these bins shall not exceed its capacity. The competent municipal
department shall control the implementation of the provisions of this Article.
Article (40)
It is prohibited to spray or use pesticides or any other chemical compounds for
purposes of agriculture, public health or otherwise except after observing the
conditions, regulations and guarantees set by the Ministry of Agriculture, the
Ministry of Health and the EEAA, particularly the following:
(A) Before spraying pesticides by any method, notify the health and
veterinary units of the types of pesticides used and their antidotes.
(B) Provide first aid facilities. 
31
(C) Provide protective clothing and material for the workers involved in
spraying.
(D) Warn citizens against approaching the sprayed areas.
(E) Have the spraying carried out by workers trained in that type of work.
(F) Refrain from spraying by planes except in cases of extreme necessity as
assessed by the Minister of Agriculture. In such event, the areas
requiring spraying shall be delineated and highlighted by a special colour
on maps which shall indicate the main obstacles to aviation and the
regions in which spraying is prohibited. Regions in the vicinity of
residential areas, apiaries, fish farms, poultry farms and cattle sheds
shall be kept off to guarantee that humans, animals, plants, waterways
and other components of the environment shall not be exposed, directly
or indirectly, now or in future, to the harmful effects of such pesticides or
chemical compounds.
Article (41)
All organizations and individuals shall be held, when carrying out exploration,
excavation, construction or demolition works, or when transporting the resultant
waste or debris, to take necessary precautions to secure the safe storage or
transportation thereof. The authority granting the building or demolition license
shall indicate these requirements in the license in the manner set forth below:
1- That on-site storage of waste or debris be effected with due regard to the
requirements of safety and the unobstructed movement of traffic and
people. Waste liable to dispersal shall be covered to avoid air pollution.
2- That waste or debris resulting from excavation, demolition and
construction works be transported in special containers or receptacles on
trucks equipped and licensed for this purpose and meeting the following
conditions:
〈 Fitted with a special box or an air-tight cover to prevent loose
particles of waste and debris from escaping into the air or
dropping on the road.
〈 Provided with special loading and unloading equipment.
〈 In good condition according to the rules of safety, solidity and
lights and fitted with all safety equipment.
3- That the sites assigned to receive the transported waste be located at a
minimum distance of 1.5 kilometers from residential areas, that they are
at a lower contour level, and that they are levelled after being filled in
with the waste.
4- That the municipal authorities designate the sites to which the waste
shall be transported. Such waste may not be transported to or disposed 
32
of in other than the sites designated and licensed for that purpose by the
municipal authorities concerned.
Article (42)
Due consideration shall be given by the competent bodies, according to their
activities, when burning any type of fuel or other substance, whether for
industrial, energy production, construction or other commercial purpose, that the
harmful smoke, gases, and fumes resulting from the combustion process are
within the permissible limits. Persons responsible for such activity shall be held
to take all precautions to minimize the pollutants in the combustion products
according to the following criteria:
Precautions, Permissible limits, and Specification
of Chimneys
(A) The necessary precautions to minimize the pollutants resulting from the
combustion process in order to prevent or reduce the emission of
pollutants from the fuel-burning source, entail selecting the appropriate
fuel, ensuring the proper design of furnaces, fire-boxes, and chimneys
and using high-efficiency control means according to the following
criteria:
1- It is prohibited to carry out uncovered burning when the
requirements of sound design to guarantee full combustion and
disposal of exhaust through the chimneys according to proper
engineering specifications are not adequate.
2- Furnaces and fire-boxes shall be designed to allow the circulation
of a sufficient quantity of air for oxidization and full combustion
and to ensure the even distribution of temperature. They shall be
operated for a sufficient length of time, and their contents
constantly stirred and mixed, to guarantee total combustion,
minimize the emission of resultants of incomplete burning and
ensure that the pollutants emitted are within the maximum
permissible limits pursuant to Annex (6) of these Executive
Regulations.
3- The use of coal shall be prohibited in populated regions and near
residential areas.
4- The use of Mazout and other heavy oil products, as well as of
crude oil, shall be prohibited in residential areas.
5- The percentage of sulphur in fuel used in urban areas close to
residential districts shall not exceed 1.5%.
6- Gases containing carbon dioxide shall be emitted through
chimneys that are high enough to ensure that the gases are
diluted before reaching ground level. When using fuel containing
high percentages of sulphur in power stations, industrial plants 
33
and other establishments in remote areas, due consideration shall
be given to atmospheric factors and to maintaining sufficient
distances to prevent the sulphur from reaching residential or
agricultural areas and waterways.
(B) Chimney heights:
1- The heights of chimneys from which a total emission of waste
reaches 7000 - 15000 kg/hour shall be between 18 and 36
metres.
2- The heights of chimneys from which a total emission of waste
exceeds 15000 kg/hour shall be at least two and a half times the
height of surrounding buildings, including the building served by
the chimney.
3- The height of chimneys serving public places such as offices,
restaurants, hotels and other commercial activities shall be at
least 3 metres higher than the edge of the building (top of the
building), and measures shall be taken to accelerate the speed at
which gas is emitted from the chimney.
(C) Maximum Limits of Emission from Fuel-Burning Sources:
Pollutant Maximum Permissible Limit
SMOKE - 1 (Using Ringlemann Card)
DISPERSED ASHES - 1 Ringlemann - sources existing in urban
regions, or close to residential areas.
- 2 Ringlemann - sources far from habitation.
- 2 Ringlemann - burning of wastes.
SULPHUR DIOXIDE Existing 4000 mgms/m3
New 2500 mgms/m3
ALDEHYDES Burning of waste 20 mgms/m3
CARBON MONOXIDE Existing 4000 mgms/m3
New 2500 mgms/m3
* (1) Ringlemann = 250 milligrams/cubic metre
* (2) Ringlemann = 500 milligrams/cubic metre
The competent administrative body is held to observe the provisions of
this Article.
Article (43)
All organizations undertaking activities in the field of exploration, drilling,
extraction, production, refining and processing of crude oil shall be held to
observe the principles and standards derived from the international oil industry
and furnished by the competent administrative authority as well as those
indicated hereunder: 
34
(1) Organizations engaging in exploration, drilling, extraction and production
of crude oil for petroleum and petrochemical products, as well as in the
production, refining, storage and transportation of gas, shall observe the
conditions, procedures, and precautions necessary for the protection of
the environment, as derived from international oil industry principles and
approved for application by the Egyptian General Petroleum Corporation,
according to the nature of each project, establishment, or operation.
(2) Executives responsible for petroleum activities shall follow the
instructions of the Egyptian General Petroleum Corporation concerning
the permissible international standard specifications with regard to
methods and ways of safe operation in all matters related to the storage
and transportation of petroleum, petrochemicals and gas, as well as to
the disposal of water and other dispensable substances while avoiding
loss of petroleum or gas. They shall also take necessary precautions with
regard to protection from fire, the protection of machines, wells, workers,
homes, oil stores and establishments, and all other measures which the
Egyptian General Petroleum Corporation considers necessary to
regulate and guarantee the proper conduct of work and to preserve the
environment and the neighbouring inhabitants. These measures shall
include in particular:
A- Ensuring that exploratory or productive wells are at a safe
distance from assembly and production stations and any other
industrial establishment, workshops, the main or subsidiary
pipelines, houses, religious and social establishments and
cemeteries.
B- Observing the conditions of distance when using explosives,
whether in seismic survey operations or pipeline laying operations.
C- Providing the wells with the necessary substances, equipment and
valves to prevent explosions and oil or gas leakage.
D- Installing the separating and flare equipment necessary for
carrying out the processes of producing, transporting, operating
and refining petroleum and petrochemical substances and gas.
E- Taking necessary precautions to prevent the leakage of
uncollectable oil and gas extracted in tests conducted during the
drilling and completion of wells, as well as any other oil or gas that
must be burned either in open pits or in flares. Due care shall be
taken to make the optimum selection as regards the number and
size of the nozzles and flares for the burning process, the use of
the sprinkling process or additional air, or the possibility of using
diesel fuel to complete the burning of heavy crude oil.
F- Installing the chimneys, flares and vents required for the
production, operation, refining and storage processes conducted 
35
at the power stations belonging to the establishment, whether for
the cold or hot gases emitted.
G- Laying down the necessary plans, preparing the machines and
equipment and appointing and training personnel to confront any
leakages or fires which occur at wellheads, pipelines, maritime or
industrial establishments, storage tanks, warehouses, workshops,
houses or any other similar establishment within the scope of the
organization business.
H- With regard to storage tanks, the following shall be observed:
1- They shall be situated no closer than the minimum prescribed
distance from the edge of main roads, railways, other storage
facilities, buildings and places exposed to fire.
2- They shall be tightly closed and the leakage of excess fumes
shall be regulated in accordance with international standard
specifications.
3- They shall be painted white or any other light colour.
4- Each tank shall be surrounded with walls to contain the
leakage of oil, if any, and the walls shall be provided with
outlets to drain rain water, provided the volume of the
substance that can be contained is equivalent to the size of
the tank or conforms to international specifications used in
designing petrochemical storage tanks.
Compressed air shall be used in measuring and operating
equipment, instead of compressed dry gas, whenever possible.
(3) All operational machinery and equipment shall be in good working order
and shall satisfy all the necessary conditions for their efficient use. Their
capacity must be adequate for the work they are designed for and they
shall undergo the necessary maintenance, servicing, and inspection
operations on a regular basis.
(4) The gases which accompany oil and which cannot be used or exploited
safely in accordance with international standard specifications shall be
disposed of.
(5) Mechanical and chemical means shall be used to extract the highest
proportion of residual waste from wells or tanks. Pits or reservoirs shall
be made available to receive what remains of such residues after their
treatment in a suitable location meeting safety requirements of distance
from wells, petroleum and industrial establishments and dwellings.
It is strictly prohibited to allow such residues to debouch onto land surfaces,
public roads, waterways, seas and shores. 
36
Article (44)
All organizations and individuals shall be held, when carrying out production,
service or other activities, particularly when operating machinery and equipment
and using horns or loudspeakers, to keep the volume below the permissible
sound intensity levels inside the work place and in the closed public places
indicated in table (1) of Annex (7) of these Executive Regulations.
Licensing authorities shall ensure that the total sounds emanating from fixed
sources in one area shall be within the permissible levels and shall ascertain
that the establishment has selected the appropriate machinery and equipment
to guarantee this in accordance with the permissible levels of sound intensity
and the time limits for exposure thereto as prescribed in Table (2) of Annex (7)
of these Executive Regulation
Article (45)
The owner of an establishment is held to take the necessary precautions and
procedures laid down by the Ministry of Manpower and Employment to prevent
the leakage or emission of air pollutants inside the work place except within the
permissible limits indicated in Annex (8) of these Executive Regulations,
whether such pollutants result from the nature of the establishment activities or
from malfunctioning equipment. He is also held to provide the necessary
protective measures for workers in accordance with the conditions of
occupational safety and health, including choosing the appropriate machinery,
equipment, material and types of fuel, taking into account the period of
exposure to these pollutants. He must also ensure adequate ventilation and
install chimneys and other air purification devices.
Article (46)
The owner of an establishment shall take the necessary measures to maintain
temperature and humidity inside the work place within the permissible limits. In
cases where it is necessary to work beyond these limits, he shall be held to
secure appropriate protective measures for the workers, whether by providing
them with special clothing or otherwise. Annex (9) of these Executive
Regulations sets the maximum and minimum limits of temperature and humidity
and the duration of exposure thereto, as well as the protective measures.
 Article (47)
Closed and semi-closed public places shall have adequate ventilation systems
consistent with the size of the place and its assimilative capacity, as well as with
the type of activity exercised therein, to ensure renewal and purity of air and
maintain it at a suitable temperature.
The following table shall indicate the quantities of air necessary for ventilating
public places: 
37
Quantity of External Air***
Cubic Decimetre/
Minute/Person
Type of Place and Activity
140 - 280 Places with a high ceiling, banks, lecture halls, places
of worship, large public places, theatres, non-smoking
rooms
280 - 420 Apartments, hairdresser salons, beauty parlours,
hotel rooms, or rooms with limited smoking.
420 - 560 Cafeterias, shops containing a small restaurant, work
places, hospital rooms, restaurants or rooms with
medium smoking.
560 - 850 Private work places, office, clinics or rooms with
heavy smoking.
850 - 1700 Lecture halls, night clubs or crowded rooms with
heavy smoking.
*** without use of air conditioners.
- The space allocated for each person shall not be less than 4.25 cubic
metres
- The floor area allocated for each person shall not be less than 1.4
square metres.
Article (48)
The director in charge of the establishment shall take adequate measures to
ban smoking in closed public places except within the designated smoking area.
Smoking in other than such area shall be considered an administrative
infraction and shall render its perpetrator liable to the disciplinary penalty in
force in the establishment.
Article (49)
The level of radioactivity or concentrations of radioactive substances in the air
shall not exceed the permissible limits as defined in a decree to be issued by
the Minister of Electricity and Energy responsible for nuclear safety after
referring to the Ministry Health and the EEAA within the period prescribed in
Article 2 of Law No. 4 of 1994.
PART THREE
PROTECTION OF WATER ENVIRONMENT
FROM POLLUTION
Chapter I
Pollution from Ships
38
Section 1
Oil Pollution
Article (50)
The owner of the ship, its master or any person responsible therefor and those
responsible for means of oil transport within the port areas or the territorial sea
or the exclusive economic zone of the ARE and the companies working in the
field of oil extraction are held to notify the competent administrative authorities
of any oil spill immediately on its occurrence, with a description of the
circumstances of the accident, the type and quantity of oil involved and the
measures taken to stop or reduce the spill. The notification must include the
following information:
1- The procedures taken to deal with the spill.
2- The quantity and type of dispersants used.
3- The probable source of the spill and whether a fire broke out or not.
4- The direction of the formed oil spill.
5- The rate of leakage, if continuing.
6- The dimensions of the oil spill.
7- The wind velocity, the air temperature and the extent of visibility.
8- The direction and speed of the current and the water temperature.
9- The condition of the sea.
10- The condition of the tide (strong, high, medium, weak).
11- The threatened coastal areas.
12- The nature of the area - coral reef - marine organisms.
13- The reporting source: name - telephone number - address.
In all cases, the competent administrative authorities are held to notify the
EEAA of all particulars concerning the accident promptly on its occurrence, in
order to enable it to follow up the measures taken in this regard in accordance
with its responsibilities as prescribed in Article (5) of the Environment Law.
Article (51)
39
All loading ports and ports equipped to receive oil tankers and dockyards must
be fitted out with the necessary equipment to receive unclean ballast water and
the bilge water from cleaning the tanks of oil tankers and other ships.
Ports must be equipped with enough barges and containers to receive the
deposits, residues, and waste of oil and oily mixtures from ships docked in port.
The competent administrative authority shall receive any ship or tanker and
direct it to the locations designated for the disposal of waste and unclean ballast
water.
No ship or tanker may be licensed to carry out loading and unloading works
except after referring to the competent administrative authority that will receive
and direct it to the locations for the disposal of waste and unclean ballast water.
Article (52)
Owners or masters of ships registered in the ARE as well as of ships pertaining
to the states adhering to the Convention are held to keep on board a register of
the oil in which shall be entered all operations relating to oil in the manner
determined in the Convention, and in particular the following operations:
a- Loading, delivery or other oil cargo transport operations, while designating
the type of oil.
b- Discharge of oil or oily mixtures to secure the safety of the ship or its cargo
or to save lives, while designating the type of oil so discharged.
c- Oil or oily mixture spills as a result of a collision or accident, while indicating
the size of the spill.
d- Discharge of unclean ballast water or of bilge water from cleaning the tanks.
e. Disposal of polluting waste.
f. Discharge of the bilge containing the oil, collected within the machinery
space, outside the ship while in port.
The process of discharging oil or oily mixtures in respect of offshore platforms
installed in the water environment shall be recorded in a special register
corresponding to the oil register provided for in this Article, in which the
following information shall be entered:
(1) The name and location of the platform.
(2) The license issued therefor.
(3) The name of the platform owner.
(4) The activity carried out by the platform. 
40
(5) A statement of the systems, equipment, instruments and units for the
treatment of oil and oily mixtures before their discharge and the system
for controlling and monitoring them.
(6) The quantity and type of substances and liquids authorized to be
discharged in the course of the year, and the rate of discharge.
(7) The actual quantity of substances and liquids discharged.
(8) A statement of breakdowns in the system, equipment, instruments and
units for the treatment of oil and oily mixtures, indicating the date and
duration of the breakdown and the results of the analysis carried out
immediately following repairs.
(9) The name and signature of the person in charge of filling in the register.
(10) Date on which the information is entered in the register.
Article (53)
In application of the provisions of Article 59 of the Environment Law, a
guarantee certificate must be presented when the tanker enters the territorial
sea. It must be valid and cover all damages and compensation as assessed by
the competent administrative authority in agreement with the EEAA.
Section 2
Pollution from Sewage and Garbage
Article (54)
Ships and offshore platforms are prohibited from discharging polluted
wastewater in the territorial sea or the exclusive economic zone of the Arab
Republic of Egypt. It must be disposed of according to the criteria and
procedures indicated hereinbelow:
Procedures for the discharge of polluted waste water from ships and
offshore platforms:
Ships and offshore platforms of all nationalities shall be held to observe the
following conditions and criteria when discharging their waste water: 
41
1- That the ship or offshore platform holds the international certificate for
the prevention of pollution by waste water drainage and that such
certificate is valid.
2- That the ship is fitted with a unit for the treatment of waste water.
3- No ship is permitted to discharge treated waste water at a distance of
less than four nautical miles from the shore.
4- Ships discharging such waste before treating it may only do so at a
distance of 12 nautical miles from the shore.
In all cases, no ship may discharge the waste water retained in the
retention tanks all at once but at moderate rates while the ship is sailing
at a speed of not less than 4 knots/hour.
Sewage disposal processes of whatever kind must neither lead to the
appearance of solid bodies, visible to the naked eye, floating in the
territorial waters nor to any change in the colour of such waters.
If the waste water is mixed with residual water which requires treatment,
such treatment must be carried out before the waste water is discharged.
The foregoing provisions shall not apply if discharge is effected to secure
the safety of the ship and the people on board, to save lives at sea, or as
a result of damage to the ship or its equipment, provided all reasonable
precautions were taken to prevent or drastically reduce such discharge
before and after the occurrence of the damage.
Article (55)
The competent bodies shall provide the necessary facilities for receiving waste,
polluted waste water and refuse from ships and ensure that such facilities are in
good working order, well maintained and regularly cleaned and sterilized.
Article (56)
The competent bodies in coordination with the competent bodies and the
municipal authorities shall, when transporting the waste gathered in the facilities
referred to in the preceding Article, ensure that such waste is not dispersed, that
no offensive odours emanate therefrom and that it is disposed of in the
locations and according to rules prescribed in Public Hygiene Law No. 38 for
1967.
Chapter II
42
Pollution from Land Based Sources
Article (57)
No building permit shall be granted for the construction of any establishments or
public places on or near the seashore which would result in the discharge of
polluting substances in violation of the provisions of the Law, of these Executive
Regulations and of the decrees issued in implementation thereof unless the
provisions of Chapter I of Part One of these Executive Regulations relating to
development and the environment are duly observed. The permit holder shall
provide suitable and adequate units for the treatment of waste which he shall
begin operating promptly when the establishment commences operations. He is
held to secure the safety and maintenance of these units on a regular basis.
Article (58)
Without prejudice to Article 2 of the Decree issuing these Executive
Regulations, industrial establishments authorized to discharge degradable
polluting substances into the water environment and on the beaches adjacent
thereto are forbidden to discharge such substances except after they are
treated and rendered compatible with the specifications and criteria prescribed
in Annex (1) of these Executive Regulations.
The Ministry of Health shall conduct periodic analyses of samples of the treated
liquid waste in its laboratories and notify the results to the competent
administrative bodies.
If the results of any analysis do not conform to the specifications and criteria
prescribed in Annex (1), the EEAA shall be notified accordingly and shall take
administrative procedures, jointly with the competent administrative authority, in
order to consider granting the party concerned licensed to perform his activities
pursuant to the provisions of these Executive Regulations a grace period of one
month to treat the waste so as to render it compatible with the prescribed
specifications and criteria. This shall be without derogation to the periods
prescribed in Article 2 of the Decree issuing these Executive Regulations for
establishments existing at the time of their issuance. If treatment is not effected
within the period prescribed above, or if it is proved from the analysis during
such period that the continuation of discharge is likely to harm the water
environment, discharge shall be halted by administrative means and the
establishment license withdrawn, without prejudice to the penalties prescribed
in the Environment Law. Industrial establishments are prohibited from
discharging the non-degradable polluting substances referred to in Annex (10)
of these Executive Regulations into the water environment.
Article (59)
It is prohibited to issue building permits for the construction of any
establishment on the seashores of the Arab Republic of Egypt at a distance of 
43
two hundred metres inwards from the shoreline, except after obtaining the
approval of the Egyptian General Authority for the Protection of Beaches, in
coordination with the EEAA.
The following procedures shall be followed in respect of permits for the
construction of these establishments:
A- The application shall be submitted in writing to the coastal governorate
concerned (the licensing authority), indicating the type of establishment
to be constructed within the prohibited zone, together with an attached
study assessing the environmental impact of the project or of new works
requiring to be carried out, including their effect on the environmental
balance of the coastal area, and on the shore line, and in particular on
the following factors:
1- Erosion
2- Sedimentation
3- Coastal currents
4- Pollution resulting from the project or works
The application shall include a detailed statement of precautions
proposed to avoid or treat these effects, if any.
B- The coastal governorate shall forward the application to the Egyptian
Authority for the Protection of Beaches to express its technical opinion on
the project, in coordination with the EEAA. The coastal governorate shall
also forward the study assessing the environmental impact of the project
to the EEAA to review same and render its opinion thereon within sixty
days from the date of receiving the said study.
C- The Egyptian Authority for the Protection of Beaches may charge the
applicant with the costs of the surveys and studies it carries out.
The Minister for Environmental Affairs, after consulting the competent
administrative authorities and the governorates concerned, shall issue the
conditions for granting a building permit to construct the establishment within
the prohibited zone, or to modify the shoreline.
Article (60)
It is prohibited to authorize the carrying out of any works which may affect the
natural shoreline of the beach or alter its configuration either inwards or
outwards, except after obtaining the approval of the Egyptian Authority for the
Protection of Beaches in coordination with the EEAA. With regard to
applications which may affect the natural shoreline of the beach or modify
same, the procedures and conditions prescribed in the preceding Article shall
be applied. 
44
Chapter III
Administrative and Judicial Procedures
Article (61)
The judicial officers vested with the power to effect seizures referred to in Article
78 of the Environment Law are authorized, in cases of violations for which the
penalty does not exceed payment of a fine or compensation, to allow the master
of the ship or an officer in charge to leave the port immediately, if he so wishes,
against payment of a temporary amount pending execution of the fine or
compensation penalty to be later adjudged, within the limits prescribed in Part
Four of the Environment Law, provided such temporary amount shall not be
less than the minimum prescribed for the violation plus all costs and
compensation to be determined by the competent administrative authority for
the removal of the effects of the violation. These amounts shall be deposited, no
later than the day after their collection, in the Environmental Protection Fund
pursuant to the provisions of Article (7) of these Executive Regulations.
A financial guarantee covering the value of such amounts and acceptable to the
competent administrative authority may be presented subject to the provisions
of the International Convention on Civil Liability for Oil Pollution signed in
Brussels in 1969.
Article (62)
The Minister in charge of Environmental Affairs shall issue a decree
establishing an appeals committee having its headquarters within the working
area of the ports or on the premises of a nearby administrative authority. It shall
be constituted as follows:
- Counselor from the State Council selected by the
president of the Council
Chairman
- Representative of the EEAA Member
- Representative of the Ports and Lighthouses
Department
Member
- Representative of the Ministry of Defence Member
- Representative of the Ministry of Petroleum Member
- Representative of the competent administrative
authority within the scope of the activities of which
the dispute arose
Member
The committee may solicit the advice of one or more experts in the field of water
environment.
The function of this committee shall be to settle administrative disputes arising
from the application of the provisions of Part Three of these Executive 
45
Regulations. The committee shall issue its decision, after hearing both parties,
by a majority of votes of members present and, in case of a tie, the chairman
shall have the casting vote.
Parties concerned may challenge the committee's decision before the
administrative courts of the State Council.
Article (63)
The competent administrative authorities may request assistance from the
ministries of defense, interior, petroleum, maritime transport, from the Suez
Canal Authority or from any other competent body, in implementing the
provisions of Part Three of these Executive Regulations according to the
conditions laid down in the decree to be issued by the Minister for
Environmental Affairs.
Part Four
FINAL PROVISIONS
Article (64)
The costs of removing the effects of the violation referred to in Article 91 of the
Environment Law shall be determined according to the following criteria:
(A) The proximity or distance of unloading from the shore, in particular the
areas of economic or touristic importance or the nature reserves.
(B) Degree of toxicity of unloaded substances.
(C) Volume and type of pollutant, and its detrimental effect on the
environment.
Article (65)
Every citizen or association concerned with environmental protection may resort
to the competent administrative or judicial agencies for the purpose of applying
the provisions of the Environment Law and of these Executive Regulations. The
Ministry of Interior, in coordination with the EEAA, shall form a police force
specialized in environmental protection within the ministry and security
departments in the governorates, whose function shall be to enforce the
provisions of laws and decrees related to environmental protection as well as to
receive complaints and reports submitted in this connection and take legal
procedures in respect thereof. 
46
ANNEXES TO THE EXECUTIVE REGULATIONS OF ENVIRONMENT LAW
NO. 4 OF 1994,
ANNEX NO. SUBJECT
1 Criteria and specifications for certain substances when discharged
into the marine environment.
2 Establishments subject to environmental assessment.
3 Model register of impact of an establishment activities on the
environment [Environmental Condition Register].
4 Wild birds and animals prohibited from being hunted, killed or
captured.
5 Maximum limits of outdoor air pollutants.
6 Permissible limits of air pollutants in emissions.
7 Permissible limits of sound intensity and periods of safe exposure
thereto.
8 Maximum limits of air pollutants inside the work place according to
type of industry.
9 Maximum and minimum limits of temperature and humidity, period
of exposure thereto, and means of protection therefrom.
10 Non-degradable polluting substances which industrial establishments
are prohibited from discharging into the marine environment. 
47
ANNEX (1)
CRITERIA AND SPECIFICATIONS FOR CERTAIN SUBSTANCES WHEN
DISCHARGED INTO THE MARINE ENVIRONMENT
Without prejudice to the provisions of Law No. 48 of 1982 concerning the Protection of
the River Nile and its Executive Regulations, the discharge of the substances indicated
hereunder shall not exceed the levels indicated opposite each.
In all cases, discharge into the marine environment is not permitted except at a
minimum distance of 500 meters from the shoreline and may not be effected in fishing
zones, bathing zones or nature reserves in order to preserve the economic or aesthetic
value of the area.
Item
Maximum limits of Criteria and
Specifications (mg/Ltr-unless otherwise
indicated.)
Temperature Not to exceed 10 degrees over the
prevailing rate.
PH 6 - 9
Colour Free of colouring materials
Biochemical Oxygen Demand ( BOD) 60
Chemical Oxgyen Demand (COD) 100
Total Dissolved Solids 2000
Volatile Solids 1800
Suspended materials 60
Turbidity NTU 50
Sulphides 1
Oil and Greases 15
Hydrocarbons of oil origin 0.5
Phosphates 5
Nitrates 40
Phenolates 1
Fluoride 1
Aluminium 3
Ammonia (nitrogen) 3
Mercury 0.005
48
Lead 0.5
Cadmium 0.05
Arsenic 0.05
Chromium 1
Copper 1.5
Nickel 0.1
Iron 1.5
Manganese 1
Zinc 5
Silver 0.1
Barium 2
Cobalt 2
Pesticides 0.2
Cyanide 0.1
Estimated Fecal Coliform Count in 100
cm3
5000 
49
ANNEX (2)
ESTABLISHMENTS SUBJECT TO THE ENVIRONMENTAL
 IMPACT ASSESSMENT
These establishments are classified according to the following criteria:
First: Type of activity.
Second: Extent of depletion of natural resources, especially water, agricultural land
and mineral wealth.
Third: Location
Fourth: Type of energy used in operating the establishment.
FIRST: TYPE OF ACTIVITY:
1. Industrial establishments subject to the provisions of Law No. 21 of 1985
concerning the Organization and Encouragement of Industry and Law No. 55 of
1977 concerning the Establishment and Operation of Thermal Machines and
Steam Boilers.
2. Tourist Establishments subject to the provisions of:
* Law No. 1 of 1973 concerning Hotel Establishments.
* Law No. 38 of 1977 concerning the Organization of Tourist Companies.
* Law No. 117 of 1983 concerning the Protection of Monuments.
* Law No. 1 of 1992 concerning Tourist Establishments
3. Companies operating in the field of oil exploration, extraction, refining, storage,
and transport and subject to the provisions of:
* Law No. 6 of 1974 authorizing the Minister of Petroleum to sign
Petroleum Concession Agreements.
* Law No. 4 of 1988 concerning Petroleum Pipelines.
4. Electricity production and generation establishments subject to the provisions of:
* Law No. 145 of 1948 establishing the Cairo Electricity and Gas
Department.
* Law No. 63 of 1974 concerning Establishments of the Electricity Sector.
* Law No. 12 of 1976 establishing the Egyptian Electricity Authority.
* Law No. 13 of 1976 establishing the Nuclear Electricity Generating
Plants Authority.
* Law No. 27 of 1976 establishing the Rural Electricity Authority.
* Law No. 102 of 1986 establishing the Authority for the Development
and Utilization of New and Renewable Energy. 
50
5. Companies operating in mines and quarries, and in the production of building
materials, which are subject to the provisions of:
* Law No. 66 of 1953 concerning Mines and Quarries.
* Law No. 86 of 1956 concerning Mines and Quarries.
6. All infrastructure projects, including plants for the treatment and recycling of
waste water or agricultural drainage water, irrigation projects, roads, bridges,
barrages, tunnels, airports, sea ports, railway stations, and others.
7. Any other establishment, activity or project liable to have a noticeable impact on
the environment and for which a decree shall be issued by the EEAA with the
agreement of the competent administrative body.
SECOND: LOCATION:
These include establishments set up on the banks of the Nile, its branches or the main
canals, as well as those operating in touristic areas and antiquities sites, in denselypopulated areas, on the shores of seas and lakes or in the nature reserves.
THIRD: EXTENT OF DEPLETION OF NATURAL RESOURCES
These include establishments which cause the denudation of agricultural land,
desertification, destruction of trees and palm trees, or the pollution of water resources,
especially the River Nile, its branches, the lakes, or underground water.
FOURTH: TYPE OF ENERGY USED
1. Fixed establishments which use thermal fuel and whose emissions exceed the
permissible levels.
2. Establishments using nuclear fuel for their operation. 
51
ANNEX (3)
MODEL REGISTER OF IMPACT OF ESTABLISHMENT
ACTIVITIES ON THE ENVIRONMENT (ENVIRNMENTAL CONDITION
REGISTER)
1. Name and address of establishment
2. Name and job title of person in charge of filling in the Register.
3. Period covered by the current data.
4. Type of activity and nature of raw materials and production during the
corresponding time period.
5. Laws governing the establishment.
6. Special conditions set by the EEAA for the establishment.
7. Statement of the types of emissions, the rates of discharge (per hour/ day/
month/ year), and method of disposal thereof.
7/1 - Gaseous
7/2 - Liquid
7/3 - Solid
7/4 - Others
8. Rates at which tests are conducted on each type of emission emanating from the
establishment.
8/1 Random samples [experimental]
* Date, time and place of each sample.
* Rate of sample collection.
* Indicators requiring to be measured (daily/ weekly/ monthly).
8/2 Samples of compound wastes
* Date and time of sample collection.
* Places of mixing and percentages of mixture in the compound sample.
* Indicators requiring to be measured (daily/ weekly/ monthly).
9. Extracted materials after treatment processes.
10. Extent of efficiency of treatment method.
11. Date and signature of officer in charge. 
52
ANNEX (4)
WILD BIRDS AND ANIMALS, PROHIBITED FROM BEING HUNTED,
KILLED OR CAPTURED
FIRST:
A. The birds and animals listed in the table attached to the Minister of Agricultural
Decree No. 28 of 1967, issued in implementation of the provisions of article 117
of Agriculture Law No. 53 of 1966.
B. Any other birds or animals determined in the international conventions to which
the Arab Republic of Egypt adheres.
C. Any other birds or animals designated in a decree to be issued by the Minister of
Agriculture in agreement with the EEAA.
SECOND: REGIONS IN WHICH HUNTING OF SUCH BIRDS AND ANIMALS
IS PROHIBITED:
A. The regions designated in the Minister of Agriculture Decree No. 472 of 1982:
It is prohibited to hunt any species of birds and animals in the following areas in
the two governorates in Sinai:
- El Zalaniq, Sabkhet El Bardaweel, and El Tinah.
- St. Catherine and Mount Serial.
- Tiran Island.
Bird hunting, fishing or removing sea shells, coral reefs, oysters and other
marine creatures, whether by trawling or hacking, are prohibited in the area
lying between Taba and Ras Mohamed on the Gulf of Aqaba.
B. Nature Reserves as defined in prime ministerial decrees issued in
implementation of Law No. 102 of 1983.
C. Rules of hunting in North Sinai issued by the Governor's Decree No. 442 of
1980.
D. Rules of huntingin South Sinai issued by the Governor's Decrees No. 15 of 1980
and No. 16 of 1980.
E. Regions designated in the international conventions to which the Arab Republic
of Egypt adheres.
F. Any other regions determined in a decree of the competent authority in
coordination with the EEAA. 
53
ANNEX (5)
MAXIMUM LIMITS OF OUTDOOR AIR POLLUTANTS
(MICROGRAM PER CUBIC METER)
POLLUTANT MAXIMUM LIMIT EXPOSURE
PERIOD
Sulphur Dioxide 350 1 hr
150 24 hrs
60 1 year
Carbon Monoxide 30 Milligrams/cubic meter 1 hr
10 Milligrams/cubic meter 8 hr
Nitrogen Dioxide 400 1 hr
150 24 hrs
Ozone 200 1 hr
120 8 hr
Suspended Particles Measured 150 24 hrs
as Black Smokes 60 1 year
Total Suspended Particles (TSP) 230 24 hrs
90 1 year
Respirable Particles (Pm 10) 70 24 hrs
Lead 1 1 year 
54
ANNEX (6)
PERMISSIBLE LIMITS OF AIR POLLUTANTS IN EMISSIONS
Air pollutants in this context are gaseous, solid, liquid or steam pollutants emitted by
various establishments within given periods and likely to impact adversely on public
health, animals, plants, material, or property, or to interfere with person's exercise of his
daily life. Accordingly, if the emission of these pollutants results in the presence of
concentrations thereof in excess of the maximum permissible limits for outdoor air, they
shall be considered air pollutants.
TABLE (1)
OVERALL PARTICLES
S.
No.
Kind of Activity Maximum Limit for Emissions (mg/m3
from Exhaust)
1. Carbon Industry 50
2. Coke Industry 50
3. Phosphates Industry 50
4. Casting and extraction of lead, zinc,
copper, and other non-ferrous
metallurgical industries.
100
5. Ferrous Industries 200 Existing
100 New
6. Cement Industry 500 Existing
200 New
7. Synthetic woods and fibers 150
8. Petroleum and Oil Refining
Industries.
100
9. Other Industries 200
55
TABLE (2)
MAXIMUM LIMITS OF GAS AND FUME
EMISSIONS FROM INDUSTRIAL ESTABLISHMENTS
Pollutant
Maximum Limit for Emissions
(mg/m3
 from exhaust)
* Aldehydes (measured as Formaldehyde) 20
* Antimony 20
* Carbon Monoxide 500 Existing
250 New
* Sulphur Dioxide
Burning Coke and Petroleum 4000 Existing
2500 New
Non-ferrous Industries 3000
Sulphuric Acid Industry & other sources 1500
* Sulphur trioxide in addition to sulphuric acid 150
* Nitric Acid
* Nitric Acid Industry 2000
* Hydrochloric Acid (Hydrogen Chloride) 100
* Hydrofluoric Acid (Hydrogen Fluoride) 15
* Lead 20
* Mercury 15
* Arsenic 20
* Heavy elements (total) 25
* Silicon Fluoride 10
* Fluorine 20 
56
Pollutant
Maximum Limit for Emissions
(mg/m3
 from exhaust)
* Tar
Graphite Electrodes Industry 50
* Cadmium 10
* Hydrogen Sulphide 10
* Chlorine 20
* Carbon
Garbage Burning 50
Electrodes Industry 250
* Organic Compounds
Burning of organic liquids 50
0.04% of crude
(oil refining)
* Copper 20
* Nickel 20
Nitrogen Oxides
Nitric Acid Industry 3000 Existing
400 New
Other sources 300 
57
ANNEX (7)
PERMISSIBLE LIMITS OF SOUND INTENSITY
AND PERIODS OF SAFE EXPOSURE THERETO
TABLE (1)
Intensity of sound inside the work place
 and closed places: *
Maximum permissible noise levels inside places
 of productive activities:
No. TYPE OF PLACE AND ACTIVITY
MAXIMUM
PERMISSIBLE NOISE
[level equivalent to
decibel (A)]
1. Work place with up to 8 hour shifts and aiming to
limit noise hazards on sense of hearing
90
2. Work place where acoustic signals and good
audibility are required
80
3. Work rooms for the follow up, measurement and
adjustment of high performance operations
65
4. Work rooms for computers, typwriters or similar
equipment
70
5. Work rooms for activities requiring routine mental
concentration
60
Maximum permissible period for exposure to noise in the work place (factories and
workshops):
* The value given hereafter is indicated on the basis of not affecting the sense of
hearing.
- Intensity of noise shall not exceed 90 decibels (A) during a daily 8-hour
work shift.
- In case of increasing noise level intensity over 90 dB (A), the period of
exposure must be reduced according to the following table:
Noise intensity level decibel (a) 95 100 105 110 115 
58
Period of exposure (one hour) 4 2 1 1/2 1/4
- The instantaneous noise intensity level during the working hours shall
not exceed 135 decibels.
- In case of exposure to different noise intensity levels of over 90 decibels:
(1) For intermittent periods during a shift, the result must not exceed:
(A1 + A2 + ....) over the integer one
 B1 B2

 whereas:
A the period of exposure to a specific level of noise (hour).
B the permissible period of exposure at the same noise level (hour)
- In case of exposure to intermittent noise emanating from sledgehammers:
Depends on the exposure period (number of impacts during the daily
shift) according to noise intensity as per the following table:
Noise intensity (Decibel) Number of permissible impacts
during the daily working hours
135 300
130 1000
125 3000
120 10000
115 30000

Noise issuing from sledgehammers shall be considered intermittent if the
period between impacts is one second or more. If the period is less, the
noise shall be considered continuous and subject to the preceding four
items.
TABLE (2)
The maximum permissible limit for noise intensity
in the different areas:
59
PERMISSIBLE LIMIT FOR NOISE
INTENSITY DECIBEL (a)
TYPE OF AREA DAY EVENING NIGHT
From To From To From To
Commercial, administrative and
downtown areas
55 65 50 60 45 55
Residential areas in which can be
found some workshops or
commercial establishments or
which are located on a main road

50 60 45 55 40 50
Residential areas in the city 45 55 40 50 35 45
Residential suburbs with low traffic 40 50 35 45 30 40
Residential rural areas, hospitals
and gardens
35 45 30 40 25 35
Industrial areas (heavy industries) 60 70 55 65 50 60
Day from 7 a.m. to 6 p.m.
Evening from 6 p.m. to 10 p.m.
Night from 10 p.m. to 7 a.m.
60
ANNEX (8)
MAXIMUM LIMITS OF AIR POLLUTANTS INSIDE
THE WORK PLACE ACCORDING TO TYPE OF INDUSTRY
Threshold Limits are the concentrations of airborne chemical substances to
which workers can be exposed day after day without adverse effects to their health and
are divided into three kinds:
1- Threshold Limits – Mean time
Is the average time of an ordinary working day (8 hours) to which the worker
may be exposed for 5 days a week throughout the period of his employment
without suffering any damage to his health.
2- Threshold Limits - Limits of exposure for a short period
They are the limits to which the workers may be continuously exposed for a
short period.
The threshold limits for short periods, are the limits of exposure for an average
period of 15 minutes and which may not be exceeded under any circumstances
during the working period. The period of exposure may not exceed 15 minutes
nor be repeated more than four times during the same day. The period between
each short exposure and the next must be at least sixty minutes.
3- The ceiling limit which may not be exceeded even for a moment. When
absorption through the skin is a factor in increasing exposure, the sign ''+ skin''
shall be placed before the critical threshold. With respect to dust that merely
causes annoyance without having tangible harmful health effects, the threshold
limits shall be 10 milligrams/cubic metre for inhalable particles.
Concerning simple asphyxiate gases which have no significant physiological
effects, the decisive factor shall be the concentration of oxygen in the
atmosphere which may not be less than 18%. 
61
Threshold Limits
Substance Mean time Limits of exposure
for a short period Remarks
Part per
million
P.P.M mg/m3
Part per
million
P.P.M mg/m3
Acetaldehyde 100 180 150 270
Acetic Acid 10 25 15 37
Acetic Anhydride 5 20 + SKIN
Acetone 750 1780 1000 2375
Acetonitrile 40 70 60 105 + SKIN
Tetrabromide Acetylene 1 15 1.5 20
Acetyl Salicylic Acid (Aspirin) 5
Acrolein 0.1 0.25 0.3 0.8
Acrylamide 0.3 0.6 + SKIN
Acrylic Acid 10 30
Acrylonitrile 2 + SKIN
Alderine 0.25 0.75 + SKIN
Allyl Alcohol 2 5 4 10 + SKIN
Allyl Chloride 1 3 2 6
Aluminium Metal and Oxides 10 20
Pyro Powders 5
Soldering Smoke Fumes 5
Soluble Salts 2
Alkylates 2
Aminopyridine 5.5 2 2 4
Ammonia 25 18 35 27
Ammonium Chloride (Fume)
n-Amyl Acetate 100 530 150 800
sec-Amyl Acetate 125 670 150 800
Aniline and Similars 2 10 5 20 + SKIN
Antimony and Its Compounds
(Counted as antimone) 0.5 
62
Threshold Limits
Substance Mean time Limits of exposure
for a short period Remarks
Part per
million
P.P.M mg/m3
Part per
million
P.P.M mg/m3
ANTU ( Alpha Naphtyl Thiourea ) 0.3 0.9
Arsenic and Its Soluble Compounds
(Counted as Arsenic)
0.2
Arsine Gas 0.05 0.2
Petroleum asphalt Fumes 5 10
Atrazine 5
Methyl Azynphos 0.2 0.6 + SKIN
Barium and Its Soluble Compounds
(Counted as Barium) 0.5
Benzene (Petrol) 10 30 25 75
Benzyl Chloride 1 5
Beryllium 0.002
Diphenyl 0.2 1.5 0.6 4
Bismuth Telluride 10 20
Sodium tetra borate (Anhydrous ) 1
Sodium tetra borate (Decahydrate) 5
Sodium tetra borate (Pentahydrate) 1
Boron Oxide 10 20
Boron Tribromide 1 10 3 30
Boron Trifluoride 1 3 + CEILING
Bromine 0.1 0.7 0.3 2
Bromine pentafluoride 0.1 0.7 0.3 2
Bromoform 0.5 5
63
Threshold Limits
Substance Mean time Limits of exposure
for a short period Remarks
Part per
million
P.P.M mg/m3
Part per
million
P.P.M mg/m3
Butadiene 1000 2200 1250 2750
Butane 800 1100
n-Butyl Acetate 150 710 200 150
sec- Butyl Acetate 200 950 250 1190
tert-Butyl Acetate 200 950 250 1190
Butyl Acrylate 10 55
n-Butyl Alcohol 50 150 + SKIN
sec- Butyl Alcohol 100 305 150 450
tert- Butyl Alcohol 100 300 150 450
Butyl Amines 5 15 + SKIN
Tetra Butyl Chromate
Counted as Chromium Oxide(CrO3)
0.1 + SKIN
CEILING
Butyl Lactate 5 25
Butyl Mercaptan 0.5 1.5
Cadmium Dusts and Salts
(Counted As Cadmium)
0.05 0.2
Cadmium Smokes 0.05 CEILING
Calcium Carbonate 20
Calcium Hydroxide 5
Calcium Oxide 2 10
Carbaryl 5 10
Carbofuran 0.1
Carbon Black 3.5 7
Carbon Dioxide 5000 9000 15000 27000
Carbon Disulphide 10 30 + SKIN
Carbon Monoxide 50 55 400 440
64
Threshold Limits
Substance Mean time Limits of exposure
for a short period Remarks
Part per
million
P.P.M mg/m3
Part per
million
P.P.M mg/m3
Carbon Tetra Chloride 5 30 20 125
Carbon Tetra Bromide 0.1 1.4 0.3 4
Chlordane 0.5 2 + SKIN
Chlorinated Camphene 0.5 1 + SKIN
Chlorinated Diphenyl Oxide 0.5 2
Chlorine 1 3 3 9
Chlorine Dioxide 0.1 0.3 0.3 0.9
Chloro Acetaldehyde 1 3 CEILING
Chlorobenzene 75 350
Chlorodiphenyl (42%) 1 2
Chlorodiphenyl (45%) 0.5 1
Chloroform 10 50 50 225
Di (chloromethyl ) Ether 0.001 0.005
Chloropicrin 10 45
Chlorpyrifos 0.2 0.6 + SKIN
Chromium and Its Compounds
(Counted on The Basis of Chromium)
0.5
Hexavalent Chromium Compounds
(Counted on The Basis of Chromium)
0.05
Volatile Coal Tar Products Which Are
Soluble In Benzene
0.2
Cobalt and its Dust and Smokes 0.1
Copper Smokes 0.2
Copper Dust and Sprinkles (Counted as
Copper)
1 2
Raw Cotton Fluff 0.2 0.6
65
Threshold Limits
Substance Mean time Limits of exposure
for a short period Remarks
Part per
million
P.P.M mg/m3
Part per
million
P.P.M mg/m3
Cresoles 5 22 + SKIN
Cyanide Salts, Counted as Cyanide 5 SKIN
Cyanogen 10 20
Cyanogen Chloride 0.3 0.6 CEILING
Cyclohexane 300 1050 375 1300
Cyclopentadiene 75 200 150 400
Cyclopentane 600 1720 900 2580
D.D.T 1 3
Decaborane 0.05 0.3 0.15 0.9 SKIN
Diazinon 0.1 0.3 + SKIN
Diazomethane 0.2 0.4
Diborane 0.1 0.1
Dichloro acetylene 0.1 04 CEILING
o-Dichlorobenzene 50 300 CEILING
para - Dichlorobenzene 75 450 110 675
1, 2 - Dichloro ethylene 200 790 250 1000
Dichloroethyl ether 5 30 10 60 + SKIN
Dichlorvos 0.1 1 0.3 3 + SKIN
Dichrotofos 0.25 + SKIN
Dieldrin 0.25 0.75 + SKIN
Diethanolamine 3 15
Dimethylaniline 5 25 10 50 + SKIN
Dinitrobenzene 0.15 1 0.5 3 + SKIN
Dinitro- O - Cresol 0.2 0.6 + SKIN
Dinitrotoluene 1.5 5 + SKIN 
66
Threshold Limits
Substance Mean time Limits of exposure
for a short period Remarks
Part per
million
P.P.M mg/m3
Part per
million
P.P.M mg/m3
Dioxin 25 90 100 360 + SKIN
Dipropylene Glycol Methyl Ether 100 600 150 900 + SKIN
Diquat 0.5 1
Disulfiram 2 5
Endosulfan 0.1 0.3 + SKIN
Endrin 0.1 0.3 + SKIN
Epichlorohydrin 2 10 5 20 + SKIN
Ethyl Acetate 400 1400
Ethanol 1000 1900
Ethanolamine 3 8 6 15
Ethylbenzene 100 435 125 545
Ethyl butyl ketone 50 230 75 345
Ethyl chloride 1000 2600 1250 3250
Ethylene diamine 10 25
Ethylene oxide 10 20
Ethylene dichloride 10 40 15 60
Ethylene glycol ( particles ) 10 20
Ethylene glycol (Vapour) 50 125 Ceiling
Ethyl mercaptan 0.5 1 2 3
Ferro vanadium Dust 1 0.3
fibrous Glass Dust 10
Fluorides 2.5
(Counted on The Basis of Fluorine)
Fluorine 2 2 4 CEILING
Formaldehyde 2 3 CEILING 
67
Threshold Limits
Substance Mean time Limits of exposure
for a short period Remarks
Part per
million
P.P.M mg/m3
Part per
million
P.P.M mg/m3
Formic Acid 5 9
Gasoline 300 900 1500
0.5
500
Heptachlor 2 + SKIN
Heptane 400 1600 500 2000
Hexachloro Cyclopentadiene 0.01 0.1 0.03 0.3
Hexachloro-Naphthalene 0.20 0.60 + SKIN
n- Hexane 50 180 1000 3600
Hexane Isomers 500 1800 1000 3600
Hydrogen Bromide 3 10
Hydrogen Cyanide 10 10 CEILING
Hydrogen Fluoride 3 2.5 6 5
Hydrogen Sulphide 10 14 14 21
Iodine 0.1 1 CEILING
Iron Oxide Smokes 3 5 10
Iron Pentacarbonyl 0.1 0.8 0.2 0.16
Isobutyl Alcohol 50 150 75 225
Isopropyl Alcohol 400 980 500 1225
Lead Dust and Smokes Non Organic 0.15 0.45
(as Lead)
Lead Arsenate 0.15 045
Lead Chromate 0.05
Lindane 0.5 0.5 + SKIN
Liquified Petroleum Gases 1000 1800 1250
Magnesium Oxides Smokes
Malathion 10
2250
10
+ SKIN
Manganese Dusts and
Compounds 5 CEILING 
68
Threshold Limits
Substance Mean time Limits of exposure
for a short period Remarks
Part per
million
P.P.M mg/m3
Part per
million
P.P.M mg/m3
(as Manganese)
Manganese Smokes 1 3
Mangenese Tetra Oxide 1
Mercury (as Mercury) + SKIN
Alkyl Compounds 0.01 0.03
Smokes Of All Other Compounds
Except Alkyl
0.05
Aryl Compounds and Inorganic
Compounds
0.1
Methomyl 2.5 + SKIN
Methoxychlor 10
Methyl Alcohol 200 260 250 310 + SKIN
Methyl Bromide 5 20 15 60
Methyl butyl ketone 5 20
Methyl chloride 50 105 100 205
Methyl chloroform 350 1900 450 2450
Diphenylmethane Diisocyanate (MDI) 0.02 0.2 CEILING
Methylene Chloride 100 360 500 1700
Methyl Ethyl Ketone 200 590 300 885
Methyl Hydrazine 0.02 0.35 + SKIN
Methyl Isocyanate 0.02 0.05 + SKIN
Methyl Mercaptan 0.5 1
Methyl Parathion 0.2 0.6 + SKIN
Mevinphos 0.01 0.1 0.03 0.3 + SKIN
Monocrotophos
Naphthalene 10 50 15 75
Nickel Carbonyl (as Nickel) 0.05 0.53
Nickel Metal 1
69
Threshold Limits
Substance Mean time Limits of exposure
for a short period Remarks
Part per
million
P.P.M mg/m3
Part per
million
P.P.M mg/m3
Soluble Compounds (as Nickel) 0.1 0.3
Nicotine 0.5 1.5 + SKIN
Nitric Acid 2 5 4 10
Nitric Oxide 25 30 35 45
Para Nitroaniline 3 + SKIN
Nitrobenzene 1 5 2 10 + SKIN
Nitro Chlorobenzene 1 2 + SKIN
Nitrogen Dioxide 3 6 5 10
Nitrogen Trifluoride 10 30 15 45
Nitroglycerin 0.02 0.2 0.05 0.5 + SKIN
Nitrotoluene 2 11 + SKIN
Octachloronaphthalene 0.1 0.3 + SKIN
Mineral Oil Sprinkles 5 10
Osmium Tetraoxide
(as Osmium)
0.0002 0.002 0.0006 0.006
Oxalic Acid 1 2
Oxygen Difluoride 0.05 0.1 0.15 0.3
Ozone 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.6
Paraffin Wax Vapours 2 6
Paraquat (Size of Inhalable Particles) 0.1
Parathion 0.1 0.3 + SKIN
Pentachloronaphthalene 0.5 2
Pentachlorophenol 0.5 1.5 + SKIN
Ethylene Dichloride 50 325
Phenol 5 19 10 38 + SKIN
Phenothiazine 5 10 + SKIN 
70
Threshold Limits
Substance Mean time Limits of exposure
for a short period Remarks
Part per
million
P.P.M mg/m3
Part per
million
P.P.M mg/m3
Para-Phenylene Diamine 0.1 + SKIN
Phenylhydrazine 5 20 1 45 + SKIN
Phenyl Mercaptan 0.5 2
Phosgene 0.1 0.4
Phosphine 0.3 0.4 1 1
Phosphoric Acid 1 3
Yellow Phosphorus 0.1 0.3
Picric Acid 0.1 0.3 + SKIN
Platinum Metal 1
Soluble Platinum Salts (as Platinum) 0.002
Potassium Hydroxide 2 CEILING
Propionic Acid 10 30 15 45
Propyl Alcohol 200 500 250 625 + SKIN
Pyrethrum 5 10
Pyridine 5 15 10 30
Rotenone 5 10
Selenium Salts (as Selenium) 0.2
Selenium Hexafluoride 0.05 0.2
Silicon 20
Silicon Carbide 20
Silver Metal 0.1
Soluble Silver Salts 0.01
Sodium Azide 0.1 0.3 CEILING
Sodium Bisulfite 5
Sodium Fluoroacetate 0.05 0.15 + SKIN 
71
Threshold Limits
Substance Mean time Limits of exposure
for a short period Remarks
Part per
million
P.P.M mg/m3
Part per
million
P.P.M mg/m3
Sodium Hydroxide 2 CEILING
Sodium Metabisulfite 5
Stibine 0.1 0.5 0.3 1.5
Protein Decomposing Enzymes
(100% Pure Crystalline Enzyme)
0.00006 CEILING
Sulphur Dioxide 2 5 5 10
Sulphuric Acid 1
Sulphur Hexafluoride 1000 6000 1250 7500
Sulphur Monochloride 1 6 3 18
Sulphur Pentafluoride 0.025 0.25 0.075 0.75
2,4,5 – Trichlorophenoxy- Acetic Acid 10 20
TEPP ( Tetra ethyl pyrophosphate ) 0.004 0.05 0.01 0.02 + SKIN
1,1,2,2, Tetrachloroethane 5 35 10 70 + SKIN
Tetra Ethyl Lead (as Lead) 0.1 0.3 + SKIN
Tetryl 1.5 3 + SKIN
Soluble Thallium salts (as Thallium) 0.1 + SKIN
Thiram 5 10
Tin & Its Inorganic Compounds
(Except Tin Tetra Oxide Counted as
Tin) 2 4
Tin Organic Compounds
(as Tin) 0.1 0.2 + SKIN
Titanium Dioxide 20
Toluene 100 375 150 560 + SKIN
Toluene Di-isocyanate 0.02 0.14 CEILING
o-toluidine 2 9 + SKIN 
72
Threshold Limits
Substance Mean time Limits of exposure
for a short period Remarks
Part per
million
P.P.M mg/m3
Part per
million
P.P.M mg/m3
Trichloroacetic Acid 1 5
1,2,4, Trichlorobenzene 5 40
Trichloroethylene 50 270 150 805
Trichloronaphthalene 5 10
2,4,6 – Trinitrotoluene 0.5 3 + SKIN
Trimethylbenzene 25 125 35 170
Triorthocresyl Phosphate 0.1 0.3
Natural Uranium & Its soluble &
insoluble Compounds (Counted as
Uranium) 0.2 0.6
Inhalable Vanadium Dusts & Smokes
(Counted as Vanadium PentaOxide)
0.5
Vinyl Chloride 5 10
Warfarin 0.1 0.3
Soldering Smokes 5
Solid Timber Dusts 1
Soft Timber Dusts 5 10
Xylene 100 435 150 655 + SKIN
Zinc Chloride Smokes 1 2
Zinc Oxide Smokes 5 10
Zirconium Compounds
(Counted as Zirconium) 5 10 
73
THRESHOLD LIMITS OF
EXPOSURE TO MINERAL DUSTS
1- SILICA - SILICON DIOXIDE:
A- CRYSTALLIZED:
Quartz: Threshold limits (million particles per cubic foot)
 300
 = __________________________________________

Percentage of Quartz Concentration in dust + 10
 Threshold limits of Inhalable dusts (LESS THAN 5 MICRONS)
 (mg/m3
)
 10 mg/m3
 = __________________________________________

Percentage of Quartz Concentration in dust + 2
Threshold limits of total dust (mg/m3
)
 30 mg/m3
 = ___________________________________________
Percentage of Quartz Concentration in dust + 3

CRISTOBALITE AND TRIDYMITE : Half the value calculated for
 Quartz shall be used.
B- UNCRYSTALLIZED SILICA
Threshold limits 20 Million particles per cubic foot
2- ASBESTOS: Asbestos dusts with fibers lengths of more than 5
micrions.
AMOSITE 0.5 of fibers per cm3 of air
CROCIDOLITE 0.2 of fibers per cm3 of air
OTHER KINDS 2 of the fibers per cm3 of air
3- TALC:
FIBROUS TYPE: 2 fibers per cm3
 of air
NON FIBROUS TYPE: 20 million particles per cubic foot of air
4- MICA: 20 million particles per cubic foot of air
5- NATURAL GRAPHITE: 15 million particles per cubic foot of air 
74
6- COAL: Inhalable Dusts:
(provided that percentage of silica is less than 5%)

 = 20 million particles per cubic foot of air(3)
If the percentage of SILICA is more than 5%
 10 mg/m3
= ____________________________
 Percentage of Silica in Inhalable dust + 2
Threshold limits for dust which only cause annoyance

(Less than 1% quartz) Threshold limits for total dust

 = 30 million particles /cubic foot
 = 10 mg/m3
 Threshold limits
for inhalable dusts = 5 mg/m3
If the percentage of quartz exceeds 1%, the Threshold limits for
quartz is applicable.
EXAMPLES:
Among the dust that only causes annoyance:
- ALUMINA
- CALCIUM CARBONATE
- MARBLE/LIMESTONE
- CALCIUM SILICATE
- PORTLAND CEMENT
- SYNTHETIC GRAPHITE
- GYPSUM - CALCIUM SULPHATE
- MAGNESIUM SULPHATE
- KAOLINE
- METALLURGICAL WOOL FIBERS
- ZINC OXIDE
- CELLULOSE FIBRES
- SPRINKLES OF VEGETABLE OILS - EXCEPT IRRITATING OILS
Threshold limits for raw cotton fluff:
Threshold limits- mean time = 0.2 mg/m3
(3) Million particles in a cubic foot x 35.5 = a Million particles per cubic metre = One particle per cubic
centimeter 
75
Threshold limits - for short exposure = 0.6 mg/m3
THRESHOLD LIMITS FOR CARCINOGENS
 AND SUSPECTED CARCINOGENS
Substance Threshold Limits Remarks
Acrylonitrile 2 ppm + Skin
Asbestos See mineral dusts
Perchloro Methyl Ether 0.001 ppm
Chromate (Clearing Chromate Ore) 0.05 mg/m3
 (as Chromium)
Hexavalent Chromium -Some Compounds
Which Are Non-Soluble In Water
 0.05 mg/m3

(as Chromium)
Volatile Materials In Coal Tar 0.2 mg/m3

(As Materials soluble in
benzene)
Nickel Dusts and Fumes
(Nickel Sulphide Roasting) 0.1 mg/m3

(As Nickel)
Vinyl Chloride 5 ppm
Benzene 10 ppm
Beryllium 2
Microgrammes/ m3
Carbon Tetrachloride 5 ppm + Skin
Chloroform 10 ppm
Hydrazine 0.1 ppm + Skin
Phenlyl Hydrazine 5 ppm + Skin
1,1-Dimethyl Hydrazine 0.5 ppm + Skin
Methyl Hydrazine 0.2 ppm + Skin -
Ceiling
Dimethyl Sulphate 0.1 ppm + Skin
Ethylene Oxide 1 ppm
Formaldehyde 1 ppm Ceiling
Hexa Chlorobutadiene 0.02 ppm
Methyl Iodide 2 ppm + Skin
2-Nitropropane 10 ppm
Beta Propio Lactone 0.5 ppm
Propyl Amine 2 ppm + Skin
Orthotoluidine 2 ppm + Skin
Vinyl Bromide 5 ppm
Vinyl Cyclohexene Dioxide 10 ppm
76
CARCINOGENIC SUBSTANCES WITH NO KNOWN THRESHOLD LIMITS
WHICH WORKERS ARE NOT ALLOWED TO TOUCH OR BECOME
EXPOSED TO IN ANY WAY
4- Octaphenenyl Amino (Parasenyl Amino)
 Benzidine
 Chloromethyl Ether
 Beta Naphthyl Amine
5- Nitro Diphenyl
INDUSTRIAL MATERIALS OR PROCESSES SUSPECTED OF
BEING CARCINOGENIC:
 AMETRYN
PRODUCTION OF ANTIMONY TRIOXIDE
PRODUCTION OF ARSENIC TRIOXIDE
BENZO (A) PYRENE
PRODUCTION OF CADMIUM OXIDE
3,3 - DICHLORO BENZEDINE
DIMETHYL CARBAYMYL CHORIDE
 ETHYLENE DIBROMIDE
HEXAMETHYL PHOSPHORIC TRI AMIDE
N- NITROSO DIMETHYL AMINE
N- PHENYL –BETA- NAPHTHYLAMINE
VENTILATION IN WORK PREMISES:
Aims at maintaining the concentration of pollutants below maximum
permissible limits. The provision of adequate ventilation inside work
premises shall be effected in one of two ways:
 1- General ventilation
 2- Local ventilation
1- GENERAL VENTILATION:
It is a suitable method for treatment of low toxicity solvent fumes. It is
not suitable for high toxicity substances, nor pollutants which are
irregularly emitted or in large quantities. It is not generally suitable for
dealing with dust and fumes.
The general ventilation system shall be computed after identifying the
volume of evaporated substances and computing the required volume of 
77
the air that needs to be moved in order to cause the change of air
sufficient for maintaining the concentration of the pollutant substance
below the maximum permissible limits.
The technical engineering aspects shall be taken into consideration when
establishing the ventilation system. A specialized engineer shall
supervise the execution of this system guided by the recommendations
set forth in the following reference book: AMERICAN CONFERENCE
OF GOVERNMENTAL INDUSTRIAL HYGIENISTS, COMMITTEE
ON VENTILATION, INDUSTRIAL VENTILATION. A MANUAL OF
RECOMMENDED PRACTICE, 13TH ED. AACGIH, Lansing, MI,
1974.
2- LOCAL VENTILATION:
It is more effective for controlling the different types of pollutants. It
consists of a hood, a set of pipes, a purifying apparatus to clear the air
before its emission outside the location, and a fan to circulate the air.
Whatever the design of the hood, the speed of air at the pollution point
source must be enough to remove it before it is dispersed in the work
premises.
Technical and engineering aspects should be taken in consideration in
designing the local ventilation system. Execution of the system must be
supervised by a specialized engineer making use of the above mentioned
reference for general ventilation.
Whenever general and local ventilation systems are used, maintenance
should be supervised periodically by a specialized engineer and
efficiency should be assessed out during periodic maintenance. 
78
ANNEX (9)
UPPER AND LOWER LIMITS FOR DEGREES OF TEMPERATURE AND
HUMIDITY, THE PERIOD OF EXPOSURE THERETO AND THE MEANS OF
PROTECTION THEREFROM
1- Workers shall not be exposed during two working hours on any one full working
day to conditions of severely high temperature, as indicated in the table and as
measured with a moistened black thermometer:
TYPE OF WORK LOW AIR
VELOCITY
HIGH AIR
VELOCITY
Light work 308 centigrade 32.28 centigrade
Medium work 27.88 centigrade 30.58 centigrade
Hard work 26.18 centigrade 28.98 centigrade
2- A worker may not be made to work wprecautionary supervision when exposed
to high temperature levels.
3- If any worker is exposed for a period of one continuous or intermittent hour
during two working hours to working conditions of extreme temperature in
excess of 26.18 centigrade for men and 24.58 centigrade for women, one or
more of the following methods shall be used to ensure that the worker's internal
temperature does not rise above 388 centigrade.
(A) Acclimatizing the worker to the temperature over a period of six days by
exposing him/her to 5% of the daily exposure period on the first working
day then increasing the period of exposure by 10% a day until it reaches
100% on the sixth day.
(B) A worker who absents himself for a period of nine days or more after the
acclimatization process or who falls ill for a period of four consecutive
days must be re-acclimatized over a period of four days by being
exposed to 50% of the daily exposure period on the first day and an
additional 20% a day thereafter so as to reach 100% exposure on the
fourth day.
4- Organizing working hours to reduce the physiological stress on the worker and
enable him to get adequate rest between the working hours.
5- Distributing the total period of work evenly on the same day.
6- Scheduling work so that jobs exposed to high temperatures are slotted into the
coolest periods of the day.
7- Scheduling short rest breaks at least once every hour to enable workers to drink
a saline solution. Each worker shall be given a minimum of 2 litres of potable 
79
water in which 0.1% salt is dissolved (without giving salt pills), and the water
supply must not be further than 60 metres from the workers.
8- Providing and using suitable protective clothing and equipment.
9- Adopting all engineering precautions and designs, and applying engineering
control and 0execution methods to reduce air temperature.
- Conducting medical examinations on workers exposed to high temperatures to
ascertain their tolerance levels, checking in particular their cardio -vascular,
respiratory and urinary systems, [liver, endocrine glands, skin and medical
history, especially in regard to heat-related diseases.
TRAINING:
3- Importance of daily weighing of the body before starting work and at the end of
duty.
4- Determining the black wet temperature degree from the equation:
MEDICALLY:
- Conducting periodic check-ups every two years for workers under the age of 46
who are exposed to high temperature and every year for older workers.
- Presence of a trained health worker to observe and confront cases and diseases
resulting from heat during work, in addition to the availability of first aid
facilities.
Workers who are exposed to high temperatures must be informed of the following:
1- Importance of drinking water during work.
2- Importance of taking salts.
4- The symptoms of the main diseases connected with heat exposure, e.g.
dehydration, drowsiness, exhaustion and cramps resulting from heat.
5- Dangers of any toxic substances or other physical hazards to which the worker is
exposed.
6- The importance of heat acclimatization (while recording the data concerning
each worker in a special file easily accessible to the worker).
Monitoring:
1- Placing a wet bulb thermometer (ordinary mercury thermometer with the
mercury reservoir wrapped in moistened gauze) in hot work places.
2- Using the black GLOB thermometer (mercury thermometer with the mercury
reservoir wrapped in black metal) in addition to the wet thermometer.
3- Waiting for half an hour before taking the reading of each thermometer. 
80
Black wet thermometer temperature degree = 0.7 x reading of wet thermometer
+ 0.3 x reading of GLOB thermometer
The following table may also be used, provided it is applied separately for each hour of
work and that the aforementioned conditions are satisfied.
SAFE STANDARDS OF TEMPERATURE DEGREES IN THE WORK
ENVIRONMENT FOR EACH WORKING HOUR

System of work and
hourly rest break
Light work Medium
work
Hard work
Continuous work 308 C 278C 258C
75% work, 25% rest 30.58C 288C 268C
50% work, 50% rest 31.58 C 29.58C 288C
25% work, 75% rest 328 C 318 C 308C
In case of work under conditions of low temperature:
In case it is necessary to work in conditions of low temperature suitable
occupational safety measures must be taken, in terms of wearing respiration
equipment to warm the inhaled air and using protective insulated clothing to
maintain the workers' internal body temperature.
 
81
ANNEX (10)
NON-DEGRADABLE POLLUTING SUBSTANCES WHICH INDUSTRIAL
ESTABLISHMENTS ARE PROHIBITED FROM DISCHARGING INTO THE
MARINE ENVIRONMENT
Non-degradable substances are those found in the environment for a long period
depending basically on the quantities discharged into the marine environment, since
some of them disintegrate after long periods ranging between a number of months and
several years, according to the composition of these substances and their concentration
in the environment.
Non-Organic Substances:
Examples:
Organic Substances:
Very Small Quantities Which Disintegrate Within Some Months:
 - Organochlorine Pesticides
 - 2,3,6-Tri chlorobiphenyl
MERCURY and its compounds
 LEAD and its compounds
CADMIUM and its compounds
COBALT - VANADIUM - NICKEL - SELENIUM - ZINC AND its
compounds
Examples:
- Organophosphorus Pesticides
- Dimethoate
- Malathion
- Aldrin, Dieldrin, DDT
 - Chloridane, Endrin
Non-Degradable With TracesContinuing For Several Years:
- Polychlorinated Biphenyls (PCBs)
 - Aroclor 1254 
82
 These substances are not completely degradable and are considered highly toxic in very
low concentrations:
Solid Substances:
- Polynuclear Aromatice Hydrocarbons (PAH)
- Benzo (a) Pyrene
 - Naphthalene
Degradable, With Very Small Quantity Decomposed Over Years
Examples:
Plastic - Fishing Nets - Ropes - Containers. 