Environmental Protection Agency Act, 1994 ACT 490
ACT 490
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY ACT, 1994
 ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS
 PART ONE
Environmental Protection
Establishment of the Agency
SECTION
1. Establishment of the Agency.
2. Functions.
3. Ministerial directions.
4. Governing body.
5. Tenure of office.
6. Allowances.
7. Meetings of the Board.
8. Disclosure of interest.
9. Committees of the Board.
10. Hazardous Chemicals Committee.
11. Regional and district offices.
 Enforcement and Control
 12. Environmental impact assessment.
13. Enforcement notice.
14. Powers of Minister.
15. Environment protection inspectors.
National Environment Fund
 16. Establishment of the Fund.
17. Objects of the Fund.
18. Management of the Fund.
19. Functions of the Board.
Administration
20. Divisions of the Agency.
21. The executive director.
22. Appointment of other staff.
23. Delegation of powers.
24. Expenses of the Agency.
25. Accounts and audit.
26. Annual and other reports.
27. Request for information.
IV -1
[Issue 1]
ACT 490 Environmental Protection Agency Act, 1994
PART TWO
Pesticides Control and
Management Registration of
Pesticides
SECTION
28. Registration.
29. Application for registration.
30. Classification of pesticides.
31. Approval.
32. Provisional clearance.
33. Duration of provisional clearance.
34. Refusal to register pesticide.
35. Duration of registration and renewal of registration.
36. Non-disclosure of confidential information.
37. Power of Agency to amend, ban or suspend
pesticides. 38. Register of pesticides.
39. Gazette publication.
Pesticides Dealers
40. Licence to deal in pesticides.
41. Exemptions.
42. Application for dealers licence.
43. Issue bf dealer's licence.
44. Safeguards for use of pesticides.
45. Suspension, cancellation of licence.
46. Appeals.
47. General regulatory power.
48. Conformity to registered pesticides.
49. Advertising of registered pesticides.
50. Containers and packaging of pesticides.
51. Records and reporting.
52. Exercise of function by the Board.
53. The Pesticides Technical Committee.
 Enforcement
54. Powers of inspectors.
55. Analysis and certificate.
56. Obstruction of inspectors.
57. Other offences and penalties.
58. Sale of pesticides.
59. Offences by body of persons.
 60. Forfeiture.
Miscellaneous
61. Customs officer.
62. Regulations.
[Issue 1] IV-2
Environmental Protection Agency Act, 1994 ACT 490
 SECTlON
~ 63. Interpretation.
64. Repeals and saving.
 65. Transitional provisions.
 ACT 490
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY ACT, 19941
AN ACT to amend and consolidate the law relating to environmental protection,
pesticides control and regulation and for related purposes.
PART ONE2
Environmental Protection
Establishment of the Agen0'
1. Establishment of the Agency
(1) There is hereby established a body to be known as the Environmental Protection
Agency.
(2) The Agency is a body corporate with perpetual succession and a common seal
and may sue and be sued in its corporate name.
(3) The Agency may, in the performance of its functions, acquire and hold movable
or immovable property and enter into a contract or any other transaction.
2. Functions
The functions of the Agency are,
(a) to advise the Minister on the formulation of policies on the environment and
in particular to make recommendations for the protection of the
environment;
to co-ordinate the activities of bodies concerned with the technical or practical aspects of the environment and serve as a channel of communication
between those bodies and the Ministry;
to co-ordinate the activities of the relevant bodies for the purposes of controlling the generation, treatment, storage, transportation and disposal of
industrial waste;
to secure by itself or in collaboration with any other person or body the
control and prevention of discharge of waste into the environment and the
protection and improvement of the quality of the environment;
(b)
(c)
(d)
I. This Act is consolidated with the Pesticides Control and Management Act, 1996 (Act 528). The 1994 Act
was assented to on 30th December, 1994.
2. Enacted as the Environmental Protection Agency Act, 1994 (Act 490).
IV -3
[Issue 1]
ACT 490 Environmental Protection Agency Act, 1994
(e) to collaborate or co-ordinate with foreign and international agencies for the
purposes of this Act;
(j) to issue environmental permits and pollution abatement notices for controlling
the volume, types, constituents and effects of waste discharges, emissions,
deposits or any other source of pollutants and of substances which are
hazardous or potentially dangerous to the quality of the environment or a
segment of the environment;
(g) to issue notice in the form of directives, procedures or warnings to any other
person or body for the purpose of controlling the volume, intensity and
quality of noise in the environment;
(h) to prescribe standards and guidelines relating to the pollution of air, water, land
and any other forms of environmental pollution including the discharge of
waste and the control of toxic substances;
(I) to ensure compliance with the laid down environmental impact assessment
procedures in the planning and execution of development projects, including
compliance in respect of existing projects;
(j) to act in liaison and co-operation with government agencies, District Assemblies
and any other bodies and institutions to control pollution and generally
protect the environment;
(k) to conduct investigations into environmental issues and advise the Minister
on these issues;
 (I) . to promote studies, research, surveys and analyses for the improvement and
protection of the environment and the maintenance of sound ecological systems in the Republic;
(m) to initiate and pursue formal and non-formal education programmes for the
creation of public awareness of the environment and its importance to the
economic and social life of the country;
(n) to promote effective planning in the management of the environment;
(0) to develop a comprehensive database on the environment and environ
mental protection for the information of the public;
(P) to conduct seminars and training programmes and gather and publish re
ports and information relating to the environment;
(q) to impose and collect environmental protection levies in accordance with
this Act and the Regulations;
(r) to regulate the import, export, manufacture, distribution, sale and use of
 pesticides; and
(s) to perform any other functions conferred on it under this Act or any other
 enactment.
3. Ministerial directions
The Minister may, in the public interest, give directives of a general nature regarding
matters of policy to the Agency in the performance of its functions.
[Issue I] IV-4
Environmental Protection Agency Act, 1994 ACT 490
4. Governing body
(1) The governing body of the Agency is a Board consisting of
(a) one person knowledgeable in environmental matters as chairman, (b)
the executive director,
(c) one representative of the Council for Scientific and Industrial Research, not
below the rank of Principal Research Officer,
(d) one representative of the Ghana Standards Board, not below the rank of
Principal Scientific Officer,
 (e) one representative each, not below the rank of director, from the Ministries
responsible for the Environment, Local Government, Finance, Health and
Education,
(/) one representative of the Association of Ghana industries, and
(g) three other persons knowledgeable in finance or commerce at least one of
whom is a woman.
(2) The members of the Board shall be appointed by the President in accordance with
article 70 of the Constitution.
(3) The President shall, in making the appointments under this section have regard to
the knowledge, expertise and experience of the persons in matters relating to the environment.
5. Tenure of office
(1) A member, other than the executive director,
 (a) shall hold office for not more than three years and is eligible for
re-appointment;
 (b) may at any time by letter addressed to the President resign from office.
(2) A member who is absent from three consecutive meetings of the Board without
sufficient cause ceases to be a member.
(3) A member may be removed from office by the President for inability to perform
the functions of office, for stated misbehaviour or for any other just cause.
(4) The chairman shall, through the Minister, notify the President of vacancies that
occur in the membership of the Board within one month of the occurrence of the vacancy.
6. Allowances
The members shall be paid the allowances which the Minister determines in consultation with the Minister responsible for Finance.
7. Meetings of the Board
(1) The Board shall ordinarily meet at least once every three months for the dispatch
of business at the times and in the places determined by the chairman.
(2) The chairman shall, at the request of not less than one-third of the members, call a
special meeting of the Board.
[Issue 1] IV -5
ACT 490
Environmental Protection Agency Act, 1994
(3) The chairman shall preside at meetings of the Board, an~ in the absence of the
chairman the members present shall elect one of their number to preside.
(4) The quorum at a meeting of the Board shall consist of the executive director or the
person acting in that capacity, and six other members, and in respect of an important matter or
question relating to policy or finance a greater number determined by the Board.
(5) Subject to subsection (4), questions before the Board shall be decided by a majority
of the members present and voting.
(6) The chairman or the person presiding at a meeting of the Board shall, in the event
of an equality of votes, have a casting vote.
"
 (7) The Board may request the attendance of a person who is not a member to any of
its meetings but that person shall not vote on a matter for decision before the meeting.
(8) The validity of the proceedings of the Board shall not be affected by a vacancy
among its members or by a defect in the appointment or qualification of a member.
(9) Subject to this section, the Board shall determine and regulate its own procedure.
8. Disclosure of interest
(1) A member who has an interest directly or indirectly in a matter for consideration
by the Board
(a)
(b)
shall disclose the nature of that interest, and
. shall not take part in the deliberation or decision of the Board with respect
to that matter.
(2) A member who fails to disclose interest under subsection (2) ceases to be a
member.
9. Committees of the Board
The Board may, in the performance of the functions of the Agency, appoint committees
comprising of members of the Board or non-members or both and assign to each committee the
functions of the Agency that the Board may determine.
10. Hazardous Chemicals Committee
(1) Without prejudice to section 9, there is hereby established a committee to be
known as the Hazardous Chemicals Committee consisting of
(a) the executive director, as chairman,
(b) one representative of
(i) the Ghana Standards Board,
(ii) the Ghana Atomic Energy Commission,
(iii) the Ghana Cocoa Board,
(iv) the Crops Services Department of the Ministry of Food and
Agriculture,
[Issue 1] IV-6
Environmental Protection Agency Act, 1994
(v) the Veterinary Services Department of the Ministry of Food and
 Agriculture,
(vi) the Council for Scientific and Industrial Research,
(c) three officials from the Agency, nominated by the Board, and
(d) three other persons who have specialised knowledge and experience in
toxic chemical management, nominated by the Minister.
(2) The functions of the Hazardous Chemicals Committee are,
(a) to monitor the use of hazardous chemicals by collecting information on the
importation, exportation, manufacture, distribution, sale, use and disposal of
those chemicals,
(b) to advise the Board and the executive director on the regulation and management of hazardous chemicals, and
(c) to perform any other functions relating to chemicals that the Board or the
 executive director may direct.
11. Regional and district offices
(1) The Board shall establish in each regional capital, and in the districts, as deter
mined by the Board, regional and district offices of the Agency.
(2) A regional or district office shall be provided with the public officers who the
Board may, in consultation with the Public Services Commission, determine.
. (3) A regional or district office shall perform the functions delegated to it by the
Board.
Enforcement and Control
12. Environmental impact assessment
(1) The Agency may, by notice in writing, require a person responsible for an undertaking which in the opinion of the Board has, or is likely to have, adverse effect on the
environment to submit within the period specified in the notice an environmental impact
assessment.
(2) Where the Agency issues a notice under subsection (1), it shall inform the organ or
the department of government that has responsibility for the issue of a licence, permit, an
approval or a consent in connection with a matter affecting the environment that the notice
has been issued, and that organ or department shall not grant the licence, permit, approval
or consent unless with the prior approval in writing of the Agency after compliance with
the notice.
13. Enforcement notice
(1) The Board shall, where it considers that the activities of an undertaking pose a serious threat to the environment or to public health, serve on the person responsible for the
undertaking, an enforcement notice requiring that person to take the steps stipulated by the
Board to prevent or stop the activities.
IV-7 [Issue 1]
..
ACT 490 Environmental Protection Agency Act, 1994
(2) An enforcement notice shall specify
 (a) the offending activity,
(b) the steps required to be taken,
(c) the time within which the steps shall be taken, and
(d) the immediate cessation, where necessary, of the offending activity.
(3) A person who acts contrary to an enforcement notice issued under subsection (1)
commits an offence and is liable on summary conviction to a fine not exceeding two
hundred and fifty penalty units and in default to a term of imprisonment not exceeding
one year or to both the fine and the imprisonment.
14. Powers of Minister
(1) Where a person to whom a notice is served under subsection (1) of section 13 fails
to comply with the directives contained in the notice within the stipulated time or a further
period that the Board may grant, the Minister may, without prejudice to a prosecution
under subsection (3) of section 13, take appropriate steps to ensure compliance with the
notice.
(2) For the purposes of subsection (1), a police officer, an officer of the Agency or a
public officer authorised by the Minister may use the force necessary for ensuring compliance with, the enforcement notice.
(3) A person who hinders or obstructs any other person acting under this section
commits an offence and is liable on summary conviction to a fine not exceeding two
hundred penalty units or to a term of imprisonment not exceeding six months or to both the
fine and the imprisonment.
(4) The amount of money reasonably incurred by the Minister or an institution to
prevent or stop the offending activity may be recovered as a civil debt from the person
responsible unless a Court otherwise determines.
15. Environment protection inspectors
(1) The Board may, for the purposes of this Act, appoint environment protection
inspectors.
(2) An inspector or a person authorised by the Board
(a) may, in addition to the powers specified in section 54, at a reasonable time
enter any premises for the purpose of ensuring compliance with this or any
other enactment pertaining to the protection of the environment, and
(b) shall, if required to do so by the person in charge of the premises, produce
the requisite authority.
(3) A person who assaults or obstructs a duly authorised person acting in the performance of a function under subsection (2) commits an offence and is liable on summary
conviction to a fine not exceeding two hundred penalty units or to a term of imprisonment
not exceeding six months or to both the fine and the imprisonment.
[Issue 1] IV-8
Environmental Protection Agency Act, 1994 ACT 490
National Environment Fund
16. Establishment of the Fund
(1) There is hereby established a fund to be known as the National Environment Fund.
(2) The Fund consists of
 (a) grants in aid from the Government for the protection or improvement of the
environment,
(b)
(c)
levies collected by the Agency in the performance of its functions, and
donations and gifts to the Agency.
17. Objects of the Fund
Moneys of the Fund shall be applied for
(a) environmental education of the general public,
(b) research, studies and investigations relating to the functions of the Agency,
(c) human resource development, and
(d) any other purpose determined by the Board in consultation with the Minister.
18. Management of the Fund
(1) The Fund shall be administered by the Board and the Controller and Accountant
General or two representatives of the Controller and Accountant-General.
(2) The moneys in the Fund shall be paid into a bank account opened by the Board
with the approval of the Controller and Accountant-General.
(3) Sections 25 and 26 on accounts and audit and annual report apply to the Fund.
19. Functions of the Board
(1) The Board shall, for the purposes of administering the Fund,
(a)
(b)
(c)
formulate policies to generate money for the Fund,
determine the allocations to be made towards the objects of the Fund, and
determine the annual targets of the Fund.
(2) The Board may invest a part of the Fund that it considers appropriate in Government securities or in a manner approved by the Minister in consultation with the Minister
responsible for Finance.
(3) Payments issued from the Fund shall be signed by the chairman, the executive director and one other member of the Board.
IV-9 [Issue 1]
ACT 490 Environmental Protection Agency Act, 1994
Administration
20. Divisions of the Agency
The Board may create departments or divisions in the Agency necessary for the efficient performance of the functions of the Agency.
21. The executive director
(1) An executive director shall be appointed by the President in accordance wi
constitution who shall be the chief executive of the Agency.
th article 195 of the
(2) The executive director shall hold office on the terms and conditions specified in the letter of appointment.
(3) Subject to the general directives of the Board, the executive director is responsible for the direction
of the work of the Agency, for the day to day administration of the affairs of the Agency and for ensuring
the implementation of the decisions of the Board.
(4) The executive director may, in writing, delegate a function to an officer of the Agency while
retaining ultimate responsibility for the performance of a delegated function.
(5) The executive director shall be the secretary to the Fund.
22. Appointment of other staff
(1) The appointment of other officers and employees necessary for the proper and
effective performance of the functions of the Agency shall be made by the President acting
in accordance with article 195 of the Constitution and on the terms and conditions
determined by the President.
(2) Other public officers may be transferred or seconded to the Agency.
(3) The Agency may engage the services of experts and consultants.
23. Delegation of powers
The President may, in accordance with clause (2) of article 195 of the Constitution,
delegate the power of appointment of public officers of the Agency.
24. Expenses of the Agency
The Board shall prepare, and submit to the Minister, at least three months before the end "
of the financial year, the estimates of revenue and expenditure of the Agency for the
following financial year for submission to Parliament.
25. Accounts and audit
(1) The Board shall maintain proper books of account and other records in the form
determined by the Auditor-General.
(2) The Board shall, not later than three months after the end of the financial year,
submit the books and records of account of the Agency for audit to the Auditor-General.
[Issue I) IV - 10
Environmental Protection Agency Act, 1994 ACT 490
(3) The Auditor-General shall, not later than three months after the submission under
subsection (2), audit the books and records of the Agency, and submit a copy of the report
to the Minister who shall lay the report before Parliament.
(4) The Auditor-General may, with the prior approval of the Minister, issue
instructions
regarding the conduct of the audit or conduct a supplementary audit.
(5) The financial year of the Agency shall be the same as the financial year of the
Government. (6) The executive director shall prepare budget estimates for each financial year and
submit the estimates to the Board for its approval and onward transmission to the Minister
in accordance with section 24.
26. Annual and other reports
(1) The Board shall, not later than seven months after the end of the financial year,
submit to the Minister an annual report on the activities of the Agency for that year which
shall include the report of the Auditor-General.
(2) The Minister shall within one month, lay the annual report before Parliament,
with the statements that the Minister considers necessary.
(3) The Board shall submit to the Minister any other reports that the Minister may in
writing require.
27. Request for information
(1) The executive director or an officer of the Agency authorised by the executive
director may request in writing from a person or request a person to attend at a time and
place specified in writing to give information which the executive director considers
reasonably necessary for the purposes of this Act.
(2) A person who
 (a) without reasonable excuse
(i) fails to provide information requested under subsection (1), or
(ii) refuses or fails to attend as requested under subsection (1), or
 (b) provides false information or an information which that person does not
have a reason to believe is true, or
(c) obstructs a public officer in the lawful performance of a function under this
Act,
commits an offence and is liable on summary conviction to a fine not exceeding two
hundred and fifty penalty units or to a term of imprisonment for one year or to both the
fine and the imprisonment.
(3) Where a body of persons is convicted of an offence under this Act or the
Regulations,
in the case of a body corporate, other than a partnership, every director or
officer of that body shall be deemed to have committed that offence;
in the case of a partnership, every partner or officer of the partnership shall
deemed to have committed that offence.
(a)
(b)
IV-11
[Issue 1]
Environmental Protection Agency Act, 1994 ACT 490
(4) A person shall not be convicted of an offence by virtue of subsection (3) if it is established that the offence was committed without that person's knowledge or connivance
and that due care and diligence was exercised to prevent the commission of the offence having regard to the circumstances.
PART TWO
Pesticides Control and Management
Registration of Pesticides
28. Registration
(1) A person shall not import, export, manufacture, distribute, advertise, sell or use a
pesticide unless the pesticide has been registered by the Agency in accordance with this
Act.
(2) Despite subsection (1), the Agency may authorise the importation of an unregistered pesticide
 (a) if the pesticide is
(i) meant for experimental or research purposes and not for distribution,
 or
(ii) for use in the event of national emergency, or
(iii) in direct transit through the Republic and the Board is satisfied that
the pesticide is permitted to enter the country of destination, or
(b)' if the Minister by legislative instrument so prescribes.
(3) The Agency may authorise the manufacture of an unregistered pesticide for export if
 (a) the pesticide would be manufactured in accordance with specifications pro
vided by the importer, and
 (b) the specifications satisfy the requirements applicable for the purpose in the
country to which it is to be exported.
 (4) In determining whether or not to approve the registration of a pesticide and the
classification of a registered pesticide, the Board shall consider
 (a) the characteristics of the pesticide formulation, such as the acute dermal,
oral or inhalation toxicity;
 (b) the persistence, mobility and susceptibility to biological concentration of
 the pesticide;
 (c) the experience gained from the use of the pesticide, such as the likelihood
of its misuse and any good safety record which is contrary to available
 laboratory toxicological information;
3. This Part was enacted as the Pesticides Control and Management Act, 1996 (Act 528).
[Issue 1]
IV - 12
Environmental Protection Agency Act, 1994 ACT 490
the relative hazards of its patterns of use, such as granular soil applications,
ultra low volume or dust aerial applications or air blast sprayer applications;
the extent of the intended use;
the supporting data and any other technical information that the Agency
may request from the applicant or from a public institution; and
any other matter relevant to the control or management of pesticides.
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
29. Application for registration
(1) A person may apply to the Agency for the registration of a pesticide.
(2) The application shall be in the prescribed form, and shall be supported by the pre
scribed fee, information, samples and any other material determined by the Agency.
30. Classification of pesticides
(1) The Agency shall, for the purposes of registration, classify a pesticide as being
 (a) for general use if, having regard to section 28 (3), it considers that the pesticide when applied for the use for which it is registered will not have an
unreasonable adverse effect on the environment; ..
. (b) for restricted use or suspended use if it considers that its use in accordance
with widespread commonly recognised practice in the absence of additional
regulatory restrictions may cause unreasonable adverse effect on people,
animals, crops or on the environment; or
 (c) a banned pesticide.
(2) Pesticides classified under subsection (1) as restricted, suspended or banned are
subject to the prior informed consent procedure defined in section 63.
31. Approval
The Agency may approve a pesticide subject to the prescribed conditions and may
only register a pesticide if it is satisfied
 (a) that the pesticide is safe and effective for the use for which it is intended,
 and
that the pesticide has been tested for efficacy and safety under local conditions.
(b)
32. Provisional clearance
(1) Where in respect of an application for registration of a pesticide, the Agency is
satisfied
that most of the information required for its registration has been provided
to the Agency, and
that the pesticide does not present a toxicological risk to people, animals,
crops or the environment,
(a)
(b)
IV - 13 [Issue 1]
Environmental Protection Agency Act, 1994 ACT 490
it may provisionally clear the pesticide for use without the registration, which shall be
temporary pending the registration of the pesticide.
(2) A provisional clearance is subject to the conditions specified in writing by the
Agency.
(3) The Agency shall cancel a provisional clearance if the application for the registration of the pesticide is refused.
33. Duration of provisional clearance
(1) A provisional clearance for a pesticide is valid for a period not exceeding one
year as determined by the Board.
(2) The Agency may require
(a) the submission of an information, and
 (b) the analysis of a sample,
which appears to the Agency to be necessary to determine whether and under what conditions a
provisional clearance shall be granted.
34. Refusal to register pesticide
On refusing to register a pesticide the Agency shall, within fourteen days of the deci
sion, inform the applicant in writing of the refusal, and the grounds for the refusal. ·
35. Duration of registration and renewal of registration
(1) A pesticide registration remains valid for a period not exceeding three years from
the date of registration.
(2) The Agency may, where it is satisfied that a registered pesticide remains safe and
effective for use in the Republic, renew the registration for further periods of three years
at a time.
(3) The renewal of a pesticide registration is subject to
 (a) the submission of the information, analysis or samples which the Agency
may require, and
 (b) any other conditions determined by the Agency.
36. Non-disclosure of confidential information
Information furnished by an applicant in respect of the registration of a pesticide or its
renewal which is agreed to by the Agency and the applicant as confidential shall not be
disclosed by the Agency unless authorised by law.
37. Power of Agency to amend, ban or suspend pesticides
The Agency, if satisfied that a registered pesticide under the existing conditions of its
registration or provisional clearance
(a) is not effective, or
(b) may cause hazard to people, animals, crops or the environment,
[Issue 1] IV - 14
Environmental Protection Agency Act, 1994 ACT 490
may by publication in the Gazette amend the classification, suspend or ban the pesticide or
cancel the registration or provisional clearance at any time after the registration or during
the period of a provisional clearance.
The Agency shall publish annually in the Gazette
38. Register of pesticides
(1) The Agency shall maintain a register of pesticides in which the Agency shall re
cord the names and particulars of registered and provisionally cleared pesticides.
(2) The contents of the register of pesticides shall be reviewed periodically by the
Agency.
39. Gazette publication
(a) registered pesticides and their classification,
(b) provisionally cleared pesticides,
(c) suspended or banned pesticides, and
(d) amendments made to the classification of pesticides.
Pesticides Dealers
40. Licence to deal in pesticides
(1) A person shall not import, export, manufacture, distribute, advertise or sell a pesticide except in accordance with a licence issued under this Act.
(2) A licence issued under this Act is subject to the conditions specified in writing by
the Agency.
41. Exemptions
The Agency may, by legislative instrument, exempt from the requirement of a licence
under section 40 a pesticide specified in the instrument.
42. Application for dealers licence
An application to import, export, manufacture, distribute, advertise or sell a pesticide
shall be made to the Agency in the prescribed form supported by the prescribed fee and
information required by the Agency.
43. Issue of dealer's licence
The Agency may issue a licence authorising the applicant to import, export, manufacture, distribute, advertise or sell pesticides if it has reasonable grounds to believe that the
applicant will comply with the conditions required under the licence.
44. Safeguards for use of pesticides
(1) A person shall not use or require an employee to use a pesticide in a manner that
is inconsistent with this Act or the Regulations.
IV - 15 [Issue 1]
ACT 490 Environmental Protection Agency Act, 1994
(2) A person concerned with the use of a pesticide shall inform any other person who
uses a pesticide of the dangers involved in the misuse of pesticides.
(3) Where the Regulations require that a pesticide shall be applied by or under the supervision of a
person authorised in that behalf by the Agency, a person shall not apply that pesticide unless authorised or
supervised.
(4) A person shall not require or permit an employee to handle or use a pesticide in the course of
employment without providing and requiring the employee to use the protective facilities and clothing
which will permit safe handling of the pesticide.
(5) Where protective facilities and clothing are required as a condition for a licence,
an employer whose employees use or handle pesticides to which the licence relates shall provide and require the use of the facilities and clothing.
(6) A person shall not harvest or offer for sale a foodstuff on which pesticides have
been used except in compliance with the prescribed practices including the interval between the application of pesticides and the harvest.
45. Suspension, cancellation of licence
The Agency may suspend or cancel a licence
(a) if it has reasonable grounds to believe that the licensee had failed or refused to
comply with this Act, the Regulations or any other conditions for the
licence, or
(b) if it considers that the cancellation or suspension appears necessary to
'prevent or remove a hazard to human beings, crops, animals or the
 environment.
46. Appeals
(1) A licensee aggrieved by a suspension or cancellation of the licence may appeal to
the Minister.
(2) The Minister shall determine the matter within thirty days after the receipt of a
written notification of the grievance.
(3) A licensee may appeal to the High Court if aggrieved
(a) by the failure of the Minister to determine the matter within the thirty days,
 or
(b) by the decision of the Minister.
47. General regulatory power
The Agency may restrict or prohibit the use of a registered pesticide in designated areas during specified periods of time.
48. Conformity to registered pesticides
(1) A person shall not alter a pesticide so as to change its formulation, composition or
usage or alter it in any other manner.
[Issue 1] IV - 16
Environmental Protection Agency Act, 1994 ACT 490
(2) A person shall not sell a registered or provisionally cleared pesticide or an unregistered pesticide imported under section 28 (2) (b) if because of
(a) a fault in manufacture,
(b) a deterioration, or
 (c) an accident or any other cause,
the pesticide fails to meet the conditions of the registration or of the provisional clearance
or the conditions of the authorisation.
49. Advertising of registered pesticides
A person shall not advertise a registered or provisionally cleared pesticide in a manner
which
(a) is false,
(b) is misleading or inconsistent with the information supplied to the Agency
at the time of the application, or
(c) omits warnings prescribed by the Agency.
50. Containers and packaging of pesticides
(1) The Agency may prescribe the containers, labels and the manner for packaging of
pesticides at the wholesale and the retail levels.
(2) Where a container, label or packaging is prescribed by the Agency for a regis
tered pesticide, a person shall not
 (a) manufacture, import, export, distribute, advertise or sell a registered pesticide
otherwise than in a package or container prescribed for the pesticide, or
 (b) alter the label of a pesticide so as to misrepresent the nature of the pesticide.
51. Records and reporting
A person who imports, exports, manufactures, distributes or sells a pesticide shall
make a record of the quantities of pesticides imported, exported, manufactured, distributed
or sold by that person and the record shall be
(a)
(b)
maintained for ten years from the time it is made, and
made available to the Agency at its request at the time and in the manner
required by the Agency.
.
52. Exercise of function by the Board
(1) The functions conferred on the Agency under this Act shall be exercised by the
Board.
(2) The Board may delegate any of its functions under this Act to a committee of the
Board, a member of the Board or to any other person.
IV -17
[Issue 1]
ACT 490 Environmental Protection Agency Act, 1994
53. The Pesticides Technical Committee
(1) There is hereby established as a committee of the Board the Pesticides Technical
Committee consisting of
(a) the chairman appointed by the Board,
(b) the Head of the Chemistry Department of the National Nuclear Research
Institute of the Ghana Atomic Energy Commission,
 (c) one representative who has expertise in pesticides from the Cocoa Services
Division of the Ghana Cocoa Board not below the rank of an executive
 director,
 (d) the director of the Plant Protection and Regulatory Services of the Ministry of Food and Agriculture,
(e) the director of the Veterinary Services Department of the Ministry of Food
and Agriculture,
(j) one representative from the Ministry of Health,
(g) one representative of the Ghana Standards Board not below the rank of a
senior scientific officer,
(h) one representative from the laboratory of the Customs, Excise and Preventive
Service not below the rank of principal collector,
(i) one representative from the Association of Ghana Industries,
(j) one representative of the Ghana National Association of Farmers and Fishermen,
(k) one representative from the Ministry responsible Lands and Forestry,
(I) one representative from the Agency not below the rank of a senior
programme officer who shall be the secretary to the Committee, and
(m) one representative of the Ministry responsible for the environment.
(2) The Committee shall perform the functions assigned to it by the Board.
 (3) The quorum for a meeting of the Committee is seven members.
(4) The Committee shall regulate its own procedure.
Enforcement
54. Power of inspectors
(1) A member of the relevant sub-committee of a District Assembly so authorised or
an inspector appointed under section 15 may
(a) inspect an equipment used or to be used in applying pesticides;
(b) inspect the storage or disposal facilities or areas used for the storage or
disposal of pesticides;
(c) inspect land actually, or reported to be, exposed to pesticides;
(d) investigate complaints of injury to human beings and animals, or damage to
land and pollution of water bodies resulting from the use of pesticides;
[Issue I]
IV - 18
Environmental Protection Agency Act, 1994 ACT 490
take samples of pesticides applied or to be applied;
monitor the sale and use of pesticides;
examine and take copies of a licence or any other documents required by
this Act or the Regulations.
(2) An inspector who has reasonable cause to believe that an offence has been committed under
this Act or against the Regulations may, without warrant,
(a) enter and search premises, other than premises used exclusively as a place of residence,
in which the inspector believes on reasonable grounds that the offence has been
committed or that a pesticide which has been illegally used is being stored;
(e)
(j)
(g)
(b) stop and search a vehicle which the inspector believes is being used in the
commission of the offence;
(c) seize the equipment, pesticide or appliance which the inspector believes on
reasonable grounds is being used in the commission of the offence;
(d) arrest a person who the inspector believes on reasonable grounds has committed
the offence.
(3) The inspector shall give a written receipt where reasonably practicable, for an article or
a thing seized pursuant to subsection (1), and the reasons for the seizure shall be stated in
the receipt.
(4) A person arrested under subsection (1) shall be taken before a Court within forty
eight hours.
(5) An inspector shall produce evidence of authority before the inspector enters and
searches any premises and in any other case produce it on request.
55. Analysis and certificate
(1) A sample of a pesticide taken for the purpose of analysis shall be submitted to and
analysed by an analyst appointed by the Agency.
(2) In proceedings under this Act, the production of a certificate signed by an analyst
appointed by the Agency is prima facie evidence of the facts stated in the certificate.
56. Obstruction of inspectors
A person who
 (a) obstructs an inspector in the exercise of a power conferred under this Act
or the Regulations, or
(b) fails to comply with a lawful enquiry or requirement made by an inspector
in accordance with section 54,
commits an offence and is liable on conviction to a fine not exceeding two hundred penalty units or to a term of imprisonment not exceeding six months or to both the fine and
the imprisonment.
IV-19 [Issue 1]
Environmental Protection Agency Act, 1994 ACT 490
57. Other offences and penalties
 (1) A person who,
(a) except as provided in section 28 (2) or otherwise exempted, imports, exports,
manufactures, distributes, advertisers, sells or uses a pesticide which has not
been registered,
(b) contrary to section 40 (1), imports, exports, manufactures, distributes, advertises or sells a
pesticide without a licence, or
(c) uses a pesticide or requires an employee to use a pesticide contrary to a
provision in section 44, or
(d) alters a pesticide so as to change its formulation, composition or usage in
a manner contrary to section 48 (1), or
 (e) sells contrary to section 48 (2), a registered or provisionally cleared pesticide which by reason of a
fault of manufacture, deterioration, accident or any other reason fails to meet the conditions required by this
Act, or
(j) contravenes a requirement provided under section 50 (2) for the presentation of pesticides,
commits an offence and is liable on conviction to a fine not exceeding five hundred penalty units or
to a term of imprisonment to not exceeding two years or to both the fine and the imprisonment, and
in the case of a continuing offence, to an additional fine not exceeding twenty-five penalty units in
respect of each day during which the offence continues.
(2) A person who contrary to section 49,
 (a) advertises a pesticide in a manner which is false, misleading or inconsistent
with the information supplied to the Agency at the time of registration, or
(b) includes on the label or accompanying instructions of a pesticide misleading or
fictitious claim,
commits an offence and is liable on conviction to a fine not exceeding two hundred and fifty
penalty units or to a term of imprisonment not exceeding one year, and in the case of a
continuing offence to an additional fine not exceeding ten penalty units in respect of each
day during which the offence continues.
(3) A person who
 (a) fails or refuses to maintain or submit the contents of records to be maintained, or
(b) deliberately or negligently makes a false record, or
(c) submits a false or a misleading statement,
commits an offence and is liable on conviction to a fine not exceeding two hundred penalty
units or to a term of imprisonment not exceeding twelve months, and in the case of a
continuing offence, to an additional fine not exceeding ten penalty units in respect of each
day during which the offence continues.
(4) A person who discloses, otherwise than as provided by this Act, a proprietary information acquired by that person in the performance of a function under this Act commits
an offence and is liable on conviction to a fine not exceeding two hundred penalty
units or to a term of imprisonment not exceeding twelve months or to both the fine and
the imprisonment.
[Issue 1] IV - 20
Environmental Protection Agency Act, 1994 ACT 490
58. Sale of pesticides
It is not a defence for a person charged with the sale of a pesticide contrary to section 28
 to plead
 (a) that at the time of the sale there was a reasonable belief that the pesticide was
registered or did not differ in any way from the purported contents of the container, or
(b) that the pesticide otherwise did not fail to meet the requirements of this Act.
59. Offences by body of persons
(1) Where a body of persons is convicted of an offence under this Act,
 (a) in the case of a body corporate, other than a partnership, every director or
officer of that body shall be deemed to have committed that offence;
(b) in the case of a partnership, every partner or officer of that body shall be
deemed to have committed that offence.
(2) A person shall not be convicted of an offence by virtue of subsection (1) if that
 person proves
(a) lack of knowledge or connivance in the commission of the offence, and
(b) the exercise of due care and diligence to prevent the commission of the
offence having regard to the circumstances.
60. Forfeiture
Where a person is convicted of an offence under this Act or the Regulations, the Court
may, in addition to any other penalty imposed, order that the equipment, pesticide or
appliance used in the commission of the offence shall be forfeited to the Republic and that
a licence issued under this Act shall be suspended for the period directed by the Court or
be cancelled.
Miscellaneous
61. Customs officer
(1) A customs officer
(a) shall assist in the enforcement of this Act, and
(b) shall prevent the importation of a pesticide where the importation is contrary to
this Act.
(2) The Agency shall provide the Commissioner of Customs, Excise and Preventive
Service with a list of licensed importers and a list of registered and banned pesticides.
(3) The Commissioner shall keep records of imported pesticides and shall, at the
regular periods directed by the Agency, submit copies to the Agency.
[Issue 1]
IV - 21
ACT 490 Environmental Protection Agency Act, 1994
62. Regulations
(1) The Minister may, on the advice of the Board, by legislative instrument, make Regulations for
 (a) standards and code of practice relating to the protection, development and
rehabilitation of the environment;
 (b) the category of undertakings, enterprises, constructions or developments in
respect of which environmental impact assessment or environmental
 management plan is required by the Agency;
 (c) the type, quantity, conditions or concentration of substances that may be
released into the environment; (d) the manufacture, importation, use, collection, storage, recycling, recovery
or disposal of substances which may be hazardous to the environment;
 (e) the disposal of waste generally;
 (j) the protection of any particular species of fauna and flora;
 (g) matters in respect of which fees are payable and the amount payable;
 (h) matters for which permits are required under this Act; and
 (i) generally for giving effect to this Act.
(2) Despite section 9 of the Statutory Instruments Act, 1959 (No. 52), Regulations
made under this section may impose a penalty not exceeding two hundred and fifty penalty units or a term of imprisonment not exceeding one year or to both the fine and the
imprisonment, and in the case of a continuing offence an additional penalty not exceeding
ten penalty units in respect of each day during which the offence is continued.
(3) The Minister may, on the advice of the Board and in consultation with Minister
responsible for Food and Agriculture, by legislative instrument, make Regulations prescribing matters relating to
(a) the manufacture, importation, exportation, distribution and sale of pesticides;
(b) the reporting of significant pesticide accidents or incidents to a designated
person or office and the procedure for the reporting;
(c) the procedure for the storage, transportation and disposal of a pesticide or
pesticide container which is considered likely to cause injury to human beings, vegetables, crops, livestock, wildlife or beneficial insects or which is
likely to pollute the environment;
(d) the form and contents of pesticide labels;
(e) the method of packaging of registered pesticides;
(j) pesticide containers and their disposal;
(g) the advertising of pesticides;
(h) the purpose for, and the manner in which the pesticide may be used;
(i) the licensing of premises where pesticides are used or dealt in;
[Issue 1] IV - 22
Environmental Protection Agency Act, 1994
(j) the practices, including pre-harvest intervals, for the harvest of crops and
the slaughter and milking of animals following exposure to pesticides;
(k) the application of pesticides that are to be made under the supervision of an
authorised person and the provision for the authorisations;
(I) the analyses of pesticides;
(m) the facilities and clothing to be used or worn while handling pesticides; (n)
the disposal of pesticides;
(0) the records to be maintained by persons importing, manufacturing, formulating,
distributing or selling pesticides;
(P) the aerial application of pesticides;
(q) pesticide applicators;
(r) the exemption of the importation of certain specified categories and quantities
of pesticides from the requirement of a licence;
(s) the prescription of fees in respect of the registration of pesticides and the
licensing of dealers by the Board; and
 (t) generally for giving effect to this Act.
(4) The Regulations may prescribe in relation to a contravention of a provision in it,
penalties not exceeding a fine of two hundred and fifty penalty units or a term of imprisonment not exceeding one year or both the fine and the imprisonment, and for additional
penalties not exceeding ten penalty units for each day in respect of a continuing offence.
63. Interpretation
In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,
 "advertising" means the promotion of the sale and use of pesticides by print or
electronic media, signs, displays, gifts, demonstration or word of mouth;
"Agency" means the Environmental Protection Agency established under
section 1;
"banned pesticide" means a pesticide for which registered use has been prohibited
by the Agency or for which registration has not been granted by the Agency for
health or environmental reasons;
"Board" means the governing body provided for under section 4 (1);
"chairman" means the chairman of the Board;
"Committee" means the Pesticides Technical Committee provided for under
section 53;
"Court" means court of competent jurisdiction;
"dealer" means a person who imports, exports, manufacturers, distributes, advertises or sells pesticide;
"defoliant" means a substance or mixture of substances which when applied to a
plant causes the leaves or foliage to drop from the plant with or without abscission;
IV - 23 [Issue 1]
ACT 490
Environmental Protection Agency Act, 1994
"desiccant" means a substance or a mixture of substances which when applied to
a plant, accelerates the drying of the tissue of the plant;
"distribute" means to supply commercially, to transport, store or sell;
"District Assembly" includes a Municipal and a Metropolitan Assembly;
"formulation" means the combination of various ingredients designed to render
the product useful and effective for the purpose claimed, or the form of pesticide as
 purchased by users;
"functions" includes powers and duties;
"Fund" means the National Environmental Fund established under section 16;
"inspector" includes a person appointed under section 15 by the Board and a
member of the relevant sub-committee of a District Assembly authorised under section 54;
"label" includes a writing, printing or an illustration made on, attached to, included in,
belonging to or accompanying a pesticide or its container;
"manufacture" in relation to a pesticide means
(a) to prepare, compound, make the active or other ingredients,
(b) to add substances, mix, formulate, package or re-package, label or other
wise treat the active ingredient with a view to its sale,
but does not include the carrying on of a bona fide research or experiment relating to a
pesticide or the doing of an act or a thing that forms part of or is incidental to that
 research or experiment;
"member" means a member of the Board;
"Minister" means the Minister responsible for the Environment;
"person responsible" includes, in relation to an undertaking, enterprise, a construction
or development, a person at whose order or on whose behalf the undertaking, enterprise,
construction or development is being done or will be done;
"pest" means an insect, a rodent, bird, fish, mollusk nematode, fungus, weed, microorganism, virus or any other kind of plant or animal life that is injurious to human or animal
health, crops, stored produce, processed foods, wood, cloths, fabrics or any other inanimate
objects;
"pesticide" means
(a) a substance or mixture of substances intended for preventing, destroying,
repelling or reducing the destructive effects of a pest, or
(b) a substance or mixture of substances intended for use as a plant regulator,
 defoliant, desiccant or wood preservative;
"plant regulator" means a substance or mixture of substances which, when applied to
ornamental or crop plants or to their produce, causes, through physiological action, the
acceleration or retardation of the rate of growth or otherwise alters the behaviour of those
plants or their produce, but does not include substances intended for
[Issue 1) IV - 24
Environmental Protection Agency Act, 1994 ACT 490
use as plant nutrients, trace elements, nutritional chemicals, plant inoculants or soil
amelioration;
"premises" includes a building, land, ship, an aircraft, a caravan, other than a
building or place used exclusively as a dwelling house;
"prescribed" means prescribed by the Regulations;
"prior informed consent procedure" means the international operation procedure
for exchanging, receiving and handling notification information by the Agency on restricted, suspended and banned pesticides for reasons of health and the environment;
"regional capital" means the administrative capital of the Region;
"Regulations" means the Regulations made under this Act;
"sell" includes to offer for sale and to provide pesticide as part of a service of pest
control although the pesticide is described as free or included in the service;
"unreasonable adverse effect on the environment" means an effect which is injurious to human, animal or plant life or which renders the environment unsafe for
human, animal or plant life.
64. Repeals and vesting
(1) The Environmental Protection Agency Act, 1994 (Act 490) and the Pesticides
Control and Management Act, 1996 (Act 528) are repealed.
~2) Despite the repeal under subsection (1),
(a) an instrument, a permit or an order issued under any of the repealed enactments
and in force at the commencement of this Act shall continue in force until
altered or revoked under this Act;
(b) the members of the Board established under section 4 of the Environmental
Protection Agency Act, 1994 (Act 490) shall continue in office until the
expiration of the term of officers specified under section 5 of that Act.
(3) The rights, assets, properties, obligations, liabilities held for or on behalf of the
dissolved Environmental Protection Agency and the persons employed for or by that
Agency are by this section transferred to the Agency established under this Act.
65. Transitional provisions
After six months from the coming into force of this Act, pesticides shall be registered
in compliance with this Act and licences for dealing in pesticides shall be issued in compliance with this Act.
[Issue 1]
IV - 25
