ENVIRONMENT ACT 2008
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS
PART I - PRELIMINARY
Sections
1. Short title, commencement and application
2. Interpretation
PART II - GENERAL PRINCIPLES
3. Principles of environmental management
4. Right to a clean and a healthy environment
PART III - INSTITUTIONAL ARRANGEMENTS
5. Establishment of the National Environment Council
6. Tenure of office
7. Meetings of the Council
8. Functions of the Council
9. Department of Environment
10. Functions of the Director
11 Establishment of Environment Coordinating Committee
12. District Environment Officer
13. Establishment of technical advisory committees
14. Proceedings of the technical advisory committee
15. Establishment of environmental units and the role of Line Ministries
PART IV - ENVIRONMENTAL PLANNING
16 Environmental planning at national level
17. Environmental planning at district level
18. Environmental management plans
299
PART V - ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT, AUDITS AND
MONITORING
19. Types of projects for which an environmental impact assessment or
environment strategic assessment is required
20. Submission of a project brief
21. Environmental impact studies and statements
22. Review of environmental impact statements
23. Environmental monitoring
24. Environmental audit
25. Environmental impact assessment licence and record of decision
26. Submission of environmental impact assessment report after issue of
environmental impact assessment licence
27. Transfer of environmental impact assessment licence
PART VI - ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY STANDARDS
28. Water quality standards
29. Air quality standards
30. Standards for waste
31. Soil quality standards
32. Standards for noise
33. Standards for ionization and other radiation
34. Standards for the control of noxious smells
35. Guidelines for environmental disasters
36. Other standards
PART VII - POLLUTION CONTROL
37. Prohibition of discharge of hazardous substances, chemicals and materials or oil into the environment and spillers liability
38. Prohibition of pollution
39. Water pollution prohibited
40. Effluents to be discharged only into sewerage system
41. Duty to supply information to inspectors
42. Cancellation of effluent discharge licence
43. Register of effluent discharge licenses
44. Pollution licence
45. Emissions by conveyance
46. Additional licensing procedure
300
47. Noise in excess of established standards prohibited
48. Exemptions
49. Offences relating to ionizing radiation
50. Powers of inspectors relating to ionizing radiation
51. Offence relating to noxious smells
PART VIII - SPILL AND ENVIRNMENTAL EMERGENCY
52. Duty to notify Director
53. Measures taken by Director
54. Clean-up and removal operations
55. Liability for spill
56. Recovery of expenses
57. Environmental emergency
58. Powers in case of spill or emergency
PART IX - ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT
59. Identification and protection of areas
60. Re-forestation and afforestation of hilly and mountainous areas
61. Protection of rivers, riverbanks, wetlands etc.
62. General and specific orders, for standards for the management of
rivers, riverbanks, lakes, lakeshore and wetlands
63. Protection of forests
64. Conservation of energy and planting of trees or woodlots
65. Conservation of Biological Diversity
66. Conservation of biological resources in situ
67. Conservation of biological resources ex-situ
68. Access to genetic resources of Lesotho
69. Management of range lands
70. Land use planning
71. Protection of natural heritage sites
72. Protection of natural environmental areas
73. Protection of the ozone layer
74. Management of dangerous materials
75. Management of hazardous waste
76. Application for a waste licence
77. Importation and exportation of hazardous waste prohibited
78. Cancellation of a waste licence
79. Court order to cease operation
301
80 Register of waste licenses and other pollution licenses
81. Management of toxic and hazardous chemicals and substances
82. Handling of toxic or hazardous chemicals or substances
83. Total Ban
PART X - ENVIRONMENTAL RESTORATION NOTICE AND ORDER
84. Environmental restoration notice
85 Service of environmental restoration notice
86. Reconsideration of environmental restoration notice
87. Action by the Director in case of non-compliance with an environmental restoration notice
88. Issue of environmental restoration order by a court
PART XI - INSPECTION AND RECORD
89. Designation of environmental inspectors
90. Powers and duties of environmental inspectors
91. Designation of analytical laboratories, analysts and reference analysts
92. Certificate of analysts
93. Record Keeping
PART XII - INTERNATIONAL ENVIRONMENTAL CONVENTIONS
94. Conventions and treaties on the environment
PART XIII - INFORMATION, EDUCATION AND PUBLIC AWARENESS
95. Freedom of access to environmental information
96. Director to collect, analyze and disseminate environmental information
97. Environmental education
PART XIV - ENVIRONMENTAL TRIBUNAL
98. Establishment of the Environmental Tribunal
99. Sittings of the Tribunal
100. Appeals to the Tribunal
101. Proceedings of the Tribunal
302
PART XV - OFFENCES
102. Offences relating to environmental inspectors
103. Offences relating to environmental impact assessment
104. Offences relating to records
105. Offences relating to environmental standards and guidelines
106. General penalty
107. Liability of bodies corporate and partnerships
108. Forfeiture, cancellation, community service and other orders
PART XVI - MISCELLANEOUS
109. Jurisdiction of courts
110. Immunity
111. Disclosure of interest
112. Allowance of members of the Council and Technical Advisory
Committee
113. Regulations
114. Inconsistency with other legislation
115. Repeal and savings
116. Consequential amendment
303
ACT NO. 10 OF 2008
Environment Act 2008
An Act to make provision for the protection and management of the environment and conservation and sustainable utilization of natural resources of
Lesotho and for connected matters.
Enacted by the Parliament of Lesotho.
PART I - PRELIMINARY
Short title, commencement and application
1. (1) This Act may be cited as the Environment Act 2008.
(2) This Act shall come into operation on such date as the Minister
may, by notice published in the Gazette appoint and the Minister may appoint
different dates for the coming into operation of different Parts of this Act.
(3) This Act shall bind the State.
Interpretation
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires -
“air quality” means the maximum concentration of a human produced
pollutant permitted in the atmosphere as prescribed under this Act;
“ambient air” means the atmosphere of colourless gases enveloping the
earth, but does not include the air within an enclosed structure or within an underground space;
“analysis” means an examination or study of a matter, substance or
process for the purpose of determining its composition, qualities or its
physical, chemical or biological effect on a segment of the environment and includes an examination of emissions or recordings of noise
or sub-sonic vibrations to determine the level of the matter or any other
characteristics of the matter, noise or sub-sonic vibration or its effect
on a segment of the environment;
304
“analyst” means a person designated under section 91;
“appointed member” means a member of the Council appointed by the
Prime Minister;
“beneficial use” means a use of the environment in a sustainable manner or an element or segment of the environment in a sustainable manner;
“biological diversity” means the variability among living organisms
from all sources including inter alia terrestrial ecosystems and aquatic
ecosystems and the ecological habitants of which they are part and
includes genetic diversity within species, between species and ecosystems;
“chemical” means a chemical substance in any form whether by itself
or in a mixture or preparation whether manufactured or derived from
nature and includes industrial chemicals, pesticides and fertilizers;
“Council” means the National Environment Council established under
section 5;
“Department” means the Department of Environment;
“developer” means the proponent of a development project or activity
that is subject to an environment impact assessment process;
“Director” means the Director of the Department of Environment;
“discharge” includes deposit, emission and leakage;
“District Development Coordinating Committee” means the District
Development Coordinating Committee established under the Local
Government Act 1997
1
;
“effluent” means waste liquid or any other fluid from domestic, agricultural, trade, commercial or industrial sites, treated or untreated and
discharged directly or indirectly into the environment or segment of the
environment;
305
“element” means any of the principal constituent parts of the environment including water, atmosphere, soil, vegetation, climate, sound,
odour, aesthetics, fish and wildlife;
“environment” means the physical factors of the surroundings of the
human beings including land, water, atmosphere, climate, sound,
odour, taste, biological factors of animals and plants and the social factors of aesthetics and includes both natural and the built environment;
“environmental audit” means the systematic, documented, periodic
and objective evaluation of how well environmental organisation,
management and equipment are performing in conserving the environment and its resources;
“environmental impact assessment” means a systematic examination
of a project or activity conducted to determine whether or not that project or activity may have adverse impact on the environment;
“environmental inspector” means a person designated under section
89;
“environmental law” means any law which relates to environmental
issues;
“environmental monitoring” means the continuous determination of
actual and potential effects of any project, activity or phenomenon on
the environment whether short term or long term;
“environmental planning” means both long-term and short-term planning that takes into account environmental issues;
“environmental resources” means both the renewable or non-renewable resources of the air, land and water including the living resources
of flora and fauna and their aesthetical qualities;
“environmental restoration order” means an order provided for under
this Act;
“environmentally friendly” means any phenomenon or activity that
does not cause appreciable harm or degradation to the environment;
306
“genetic resources” means genetic material of actual or potential value;
“handling” includes production, transportation, use, storage, and discharge of toxic hazardous chemicals;
“hazardous substance” means a chemical, waste, gas, liquid, odour,
heat, pharmaceutical, plant, animal which is harmful to the environment and includes narcotics and drugs and radioactive materials which
are harmful to the environment;
“hazardous waste” means waste which is poisonous, corrosive, noxious, explosive, inflammable, radioactive, toxic or harmful to the environment;
“Line Ministry” means a Ministry, Department, parastatal or agency in
which any law vests functions for the protection, conservation or management of any segment of the environment or whose activities may
have an impact on the environment as defined in this Act;
“local authority” has the same meaning as in the Local Government
Act 1997;
“Minister” means the Minister responsible for environment;
“Ministry” means the Ministry responsible for the administration of
this Act”;
“National Environmental Action Plan” means the plan provided for
under section 16;
“noise” means any sound that is likely to be injurious to human health
or the environment;
“oil” includes -
(a) crude oil, fuel oil, lubricating oil, petrol, paraffin and
any other petroleum product capable of causing pollution whether in a solid or liquid form; and
(b) any other substance which may be prescribed by the
307
Minister,
by notice published in the gazette, to be oil for the purposes of this Act;”
“ozone layer” means the ozone layer defined in the Vienna Convention
for the Protection of the Ozone Layer 1985;
“person” includes any company or association or body of persons corporate or unincorporate;
“pollutant” means a substance whether liquid, solid or gaseous which
directly or indirectly alters the quality of a segment or element of the
receiving environment so as to affect any beneficial use adversely or is
hazardous or potentially hazardous to human health or the environment
and includes objectionable odours, radio-activity, noise, temperature
change or physical, chemical or biological change to any segment or
element of the environment;
“polluter-pays principle” means that the cost of cleaning up a segment
of the environment damaged by pollution, compensating victims of
pollution, cost of beneficial uses lost as a result of an act of pollution
and other costs that are connected or incidental to the foregoing, is to
be paid or borne by the person convicted of pollution under this Act or
any other applicable law;
“pollution” means any indirect or direct alteration of the physical, thermal, chemical, biological or radio-active properties of a segment of the
environment by discharging, emitting or depositing substances or
wastes so as to affect any beneficial use adversely, to cause a condition
which is hazardous or potentially hazardous to public health, safety,
welfare or to animals, birds, wildlife, fish or aquatic life or to plants or
cause a contravention of any condition, limitation or restriction to
which is subject to a licence issued under this Act;
“precautionary principle” means that where there are threats of damage
to the environment, whether serious or irreversible, lack of full scientific certainty shall not be used as a reason for postponing cost-effective measures to prevent environmental degradation;
“Prime Minister” means the Prime Minister of Lesotho;
308
“Principal Secretary” means the Principal Secretary of the Ministry
responsible for environment;
“project” includes both project and policy that leads to projects which
have or are likely to have an impact on the environment;
“spill’ means a discharge of a pollutant into the environment from or
out of a structure, vehicle, vessel, aircraft or other carrier or container,
which -
(a) is abnormal having regard to all the circumstances of
the discharge; and
(b) poses a serious threat to the environment and human
health;
“soil” means an upper layer of earth and includes sand, rock, shales,
minerals, vegetation and soil flora, and fauna in the soil and derivatives
such as dust;
“standard” means the limits of pollution established under this Act or
under the regulations made under this Act or any other law;
“strategic environmental assessment” means an assessment of the positive and adverse effects that the implementation of Bill, regulation or
of a public policy, programme or plan is likely to have on the environment;
“sustainable development” means development that meets the needs of
the present generation without compromising the ability of future generations to meet their needs by maintaining the carrying capacity of the
supporting ecosystems;
“sustainable use” means present use of the environment or natural
resources which does not compromise or impose on the ability to use
the same by future generations or degraded the carrying capacity of
supporting ecosystems;
“Tribunal” means the Environmental Tribunal established under section 98;
309
“waste” means any substance that may be prescribed as waste or any
matter, whether liquid, solid, gaseous, or radio-active, which is discharged, emitted or deposited in the environment in such volume, composition or manner as to cause an alteration of the environment;
“water” means drinking water, water used for domestic and industrial
purposes and for animals, plants and includes river, stream, watercourse, reservoir, well, dam, canal, channel, lake, swamp, open drain
or underground water; and
“wetland” means an area permanently or seasonally flooded by water
where plants and animals have become adapted.
PART II - GENERAL PRINCIPLES
Principles of environmental management
3. (1) The Director shall ensure that the principles of environmental
management set out in subsection (2) are observed.
(2) The principles of environmental management referred to in
subsection (1) are as follows:
(a) to assure every person living in Lesotho the fundamental right to a clean and healthy environment;
(b) to ensure that sustainable development is achieved
through the sound management of the environment;
(c) to use and conserve the environment and natural
resources of the Basotho Nation for the benefit of both
present and future generations, taking into account the
rate of population growth and the productivity of available resources;
(d) to maintain stable and functioning relations between
the living and non-living parts of the environment
through preserving biological diversity and respecting
the principle of optimum sustainable yields in the use
of natural resources;
310
(e) to reclaim lost ecosystems where possible and reverse
the degradation of natural resources;
(f) to publish data on environmental quality and natural
resources;
(g) to encourage participation by the people of Lesotho in
the development of policies, plans and processes for
the management of the environment;
(h) to ensure that waste generation is minimized and safely disposed of;
(i) to prevent, any interference with the climate and
adverse disturbances of the atmosphere and take compensatory measures for any unavoidable interference;
(j) to take measures to preserve the cultural heritage of the
Basotho Nation for the benefit of both present and
future generations;
(k) to establish adequate environmental protection standards and monitor changes in environmental quality;
(l) to require prior environmental impact assessment of
proposed projects or activities which are likely to have
adverse effects on the environment or natural
resources;
(m) to ensure that environmental awareness is treated as an
integral part of education at all levels;
(n) to ensure that the cost of environmental abuse or
impairment are borne by the polluter;
(o) to promote co-operation with other governments and
relevant national, international and regional organisations and other bodies concerned with the protection of
the environment; and
311
(p) to ensure that appropriate measures are taken to prevent soil erosion.
Right to a clean and healthy environment
4. (1) Every person living in Lesotho -
(a) has a right to a scenic, clean and healthy environment;
and
(b) has a duty to safeguard and enhance the environment
including the duty to inform the Director of all activities and phenomena that may affect the environment
significantly.
(2) Every person may, where the right referred to in subsection (1)
is threatened as a result of an activity or omission which is causing or likely
to cause harm to human health or environment, bring action against the person
whose activity or omission is causing or is likely to cause harm to human
health or the environment.
(3) The action referred to in subsection (2) may -
(a) seek prevention or discontinuance of the activity or
omission, which is causing or is likely to cause harm
to human health or the environment;
(b) request that the on-going activity be subjected to an
environmental audit;
(c) request that the on-going activity be subjected to an
environmental monitoring;
(d) request that measures to protect the environment or
human health be taken by the person whose activity or
omission is causing or is likely to cause harm to
human health or the environment.
(4) The court shall in exercising its jurisdiction, be guided by the
following principles of sustainable development -
312
(a) the polluter pays principle;
(b) the precautionary principle;
(c) the principle of eco-system integrity;
(d) the principle of public participation in the development
of policies, plans and processes for the management of
the environment; and
(e) the principle of inter-generational and intra-generational equity.
PART III - INSTITUTIONAL ARRANGEMENTS
Establishment of National Environment Council
5. (1) There is established a body to be known as the National
Environment Council.
(2) The Council shall consist of the following:
(a) the Minister responsible for environment, who shall be
the Chairman;
(b) the Minister responsible for trade, industry and marketing;
(c) the Minister responsible for agriculture;
(d) the Minister responsible for local government;
(e) the Minister responsible for public works;
(f) the Minister responsible for development planning;
(g) the Minister responsible for health;
(h) the Minister responsible for natural resources;
313
(i) the Minister responsible for forestry and land reclamation;
(j) the Minister responsible for science and technology;
(k) the Principal Secretary who shall be the secretary;
(l) a representative of Lesotho Council of NonGovernmental Organisations appointed by the Minister
on the recommendation of the Lesotho Council of
Non-Governmental Organisations;
(m) a representative of the business sector appointed by the
Minister on the recommendation of the business sector;
(n) a representative of the Lesotho National Council of
Women appointed by the Minister on the recommendation of the Lesotho Council of Women;
(o) a representative of youth appointed by the Minister
on the recommendation of a legally registered youth
organization;
(p) a person who has knowledge and experience in environmental issues appointed by the Minister.
(3) The Chairman may invite any other Minister to the meetings of
the Council when issues of that Minister’s department are discussed but such
Minister shall not have power to vote.
Tenure of office
6. (1) An appointed member shall hold office for a period of three
years from the date of appointment and is eligible for re-appointment upon the
expiration of the term of office.
(2) An appointed member shall vacate office if he -
(a) is unable to exercise the functions of his office;
314
(b) has been convicted of a criminal offence and sentenced
to imprisonment without the option of a fine;
(c) is unfit for his duties;
(d) has been absent from three consecutive meetings of the
Council without the permission of the Chairman.
(3) An appointed member of the Council may resign his office by
writing to the Minister.
Meetings of the Council
7. (1) The Council shall meet at least 2 times a year and as often as it
deems necessary.
(2) Nine members of the Council shall form a quorum at a meeting of the Council.
(3) The Chairman shall preside at the meetings of the Council and
in his absence, members present shall elect one of their number, who shall be
a Minister to preside.
(4) Any question before the Council at a meeting shall be decided
by the majority of the members present and voting, and in the event of an
equality of votes the Chairman or the person presiding shall have a casting
vote.
(5) The Chairman may invite any person to attend and participate
in the discussions of the Council but that person shall not have a right to vote.
(6) The Council may determine its rules of procedure.
Functions of the Council
8. The Council shall -
(a) set national goals and objectives and determine policies
and priorities for the protection of the environment
having due regard to the recommendations of the
315
Minister;
(b) promote coordination and co-operation among Line
Ministries, local authorities, private sector, non-governmental organisations and other organisations
engaged in environmental protection programmes;
(c) promote the harmonization of the plans and policies of
the various sectors;
(d) identify obstacles to the implementation of environmental policy and programmes and ensure implementation of these policies and programmes;
(e) promote the integration of environmental considerations in all aspects of socio-economic planning;
(f) review progress made by Line Ministries, local
authorities and parastatals on any aspect of environmental projects and programmes;
(g) monitor and review the activities of Line Ministries
concerned with the protection and management of the
environment; and
(h) issue, to Line Ministries such directives as it may
determine.
Department of Environment
9. (1) This Act shall be administered by the Department which is an
office in the public service.
(2) The Department shall be under the direct supervision and
control of the Director.
(3) The Director shall -
(a) be a public officer;
316
(b) be responsible for the day to day business of the
Department; and
(c) carry out the duties and functions provided under this
Act and such other duties as the Minister may assign to
him;
(d) be responsible to the principal Secretary for the proper
discharge of his functions under this Act.
Functions of` the Director
10. (1) The functions of the Director are to -
(a) propose and develop policies on all aspects of environmental protection and management pursuant to national objectives and goals set by the Council;
(b) co-ordinate, monitor and supervise all sectoral activities in the field of environment and all environmental
management programmes and where he deems it necessary, issue directions to any Line Ministry or local
authority for the promotion of such programmes;
(c) implement national environmental policy;
(d) ensure the integration of environmental concerns in
national planning through co-ordination with all Line
Ministries and other relevant bodies;
(e) initiate legislative proposals, standards and guidelines
on the environment in accordance with this Act;
(f) review and approve environmental impact assessments
and environmental impact statements submitted in
accordance with this Act;
(g) identify projects, activities, policies and programmes
or types of projects, policies or activities for which
environmental impact assessment must be conducted
317
under this Act;
(h) undertake research, compile and disseminate information about the environment;
(i) promote public awareness through formal and non-formal education on environmental management issues;
(j) mobilize and monitor the use of resources for environmental management;
(k) prepare in consultation with the relevant Line
Ministries and other relevant bodies proposals of the
country's environmental policies and formulate implementation strategies for such policies;
(l) monitor and assess projects or activities that are being
carried out by relevant Line Ministries and bodies to
ensure that the environment is not damaged by such
projects or activities and that environmental management objectives are being adhered to and adequate
early warning on impeding environmental emergencies
is given;
(m) undertake in co-operation with relevant Line Ministries
and relevant bodies programmes intended to enhance
public awareness about the need for sound environmental management and secure public support by
encouraging efforts made in that regard;
(n) publish and disseminate manuals, codes, standards,
guidelines or any other material relating to environmental management and prevention or abatement of
pollution;
(o) render advice and technical support, where possible, to
bodies engaged in environment and natural resource
management so as to enable them to carry out their
responsibilities effectively;
318
(p) prepare and publish every five years a report on the
state of environment and environment management in
Lesotho;
(q) promote and implement co-operation in environment
management with similar bodies in other countries and
with international bodies concerned with the protection
of the environment;
(r) collect and make available through publication and
other appropriate means and in co-operation with public and private organisations, basic scientific data and
other information pertaining to pollution, degradation
and environmental protection matters;
(s) establish such environmental criteria, guidelines, specifications or standards for the protection of the land, air,
water, health and welfare of the population from environmental degradation;
(t) establish guidelines and procedures for industrial, agricultural or any other activities in order to minimize
damage to environment;
(u) investigate reports of pollution and other related matters;
(v) initiate and co-ordinate actions required in a state of
environmental emergency or any other situations
which may pose a serious threat to the environment and
public health; and
(w) carry out such other functions as may be required by
the Council or the Minister, as may be incidental or
conducive to the exercise by the Director of any or all
the functions provided under this Act.
(2) The Director may, in the performance of his functions under
subsection (1), delegate, by notice published in the Gazette, any of his functions to a Line Ministry, a technical advisory committee or any public officer.
319
Environment Coordinating Committee
11. (1) There shall be an Environment Coordinating Committee
which shall consist of -
(a) the Principal Secretary, who shall be the Chairman;
(b) the Principal Secretary of the Ministry responsible for
natural resources;
(c) the Principal Secretary of the Ministry responsible for
local government;
(d) the Principal Secretary of the Ministry responsible for
finance and planning;
(e) the Principal Secretary of the Ministry responsible for
agriculture;
(f) the Principal Secretary of the Ministry responsible for
forestry and land reclamation;
(g) the Principal Secretary of the Ministry responsible for
trade and industry;
(h) the Principal Secretary of the Ministry responsible for
health;
(i) the Principal Secretary of the Ministry responsible for
public works;
(j) the Principal Secretary of the Ministry responsible for
science and technology;
(k) the Director who shall be the secretary.
(2) The Committee shall -
(a) ensure that there is maximum cooperation and coordination among Line Ministries and other organisations,
320
dealing with environment protection and management;
(b) develop such policies and administrative measures as
are necessary to ensure prompt and effective consultation on matters relating to environment protection and
management;
(c) ensure that information relating to environmental issues
is shared among the Line Ministries so as to develop a
better understanding of environmental issues and of
problems relating to enforcement of environmental
laws;
(d) advise the Minister and, where requested, the Council,
on matters relating to environmental standards, guidelines, codes of practice and other control measures for
the purpose of avoiding duplication of functions among
Line Ministries and of ensuring proper enforcement of
environmental laws; and
(e) ensure compliance with, implementation and enforcement of, any direction given by the Minister in relation
to the coordination in the administration and enforcement of an environmental law among the various Line
Ministries.
District Environment Officer
12 (1) There shall be in every district, a District Environment Officer,
who shall be a public officer.
(2). The District Environment Officer shall be a member of the
District Development Coordinating Committee and shall -
(a) advise the District Development Coordinating Committee on all matters relating to the environment and the
performance of its functions under section 17;
(b) report to the Director on all matters relating to the protection and management of the environment and con321
servation and sustainable utilization of natural resources
in the district;
(c) promote environmental awareness in the district on the
protection and management of the environment and the
conservation of natural resources;
(d) gather and manage information on the environment and
the utilization of natural resources in the district;
(e) submit such reports to the Director as the Director may
require; and
(f) perform such other functions as the Director may assign
to him.
Technical advisory committees
13. (1) The Minister may establish such technical advisory committees as he thinks fit to advice him on matters pertaining to the scientific and
technical aspects of environmental protection and management.
(2) The technical advisory committee established under subsection
(1) shall provide advice on any matter specified by the Minister.
(3) The technical advisory committee shall be discharged on submission of its opinion on the matter referred to it unless the Minister requests
for further advice or directs otherwise.
Proceedings of the Technical Advisory Committee
14. (1) The Director shall be the Chairman of the technical advisory
committee established under section 13.
(2) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the technical advisory
committee shall regulate its meetings and adopt its own procedure.
Establishment of environmental units and the role of Line Ministries
15. (1) Each Line Ministry shall establish an environmental unit that
322
shall have such functions, duties and powers as the Line Ministry may assign
to it, which shall include,
(a) responsibility for assuring compliance by that Line
Ministry with the requirements of this Act; and
(b) liaison with the Director on matters involving environment and all matters with respect to which co-operation
or shared responsibility is desirable or required under
this Act.
(2) Each Line Ministry shall carry out its functions and duties in
connection with the environment as prescribed in any law provided that such
law does not conflict with the provisions of this Act.
(3) A Line Ministry charged with the management of any segment
of the environment under any law shall submit to the Director -
(a) an annual report concerning the state of that segment of
the environment and the measures taken by that Line
Ministry to maintain or improve the environment; and
(b) through its environmental unit such other report as may
be required by the Director.
(4) A Line Ministry shall report as soon as practicable to the
Director through its environmental unit any contravention of any environmental law relating to its sphere of responsibility.
(5) Where a Line Ministry suspects or detects any contravention of
an environmental law beyond its sphere of responsibility, it shall through its
environmental unit forthwith inform the Director and the relevant Line
Ministry.
(6)
A Line Ministry shall in respect of its sphere of responsibility -
(a) supervise enforcement of national environmental standards, guidelines, notices, orders and directives issued
under an environmental law;
323
(b) verify compliance with environment laws;
(c) conduct such regular monitoring, sampling, testing and
analyses so as to ensure compliance with environmental laws;
(d) provide such assistance as may be required for reviewing an environmental impact assessment report, and in
case of a spill or environmental emergency;
(e) carry out directions issued by the Minister.
(7) Where a Line Ministry fails to prosecute an offence or take
action or issue a notice in connection with a breach, or with an alleged or suspected breach, of an environmental law, the Minister may issue such direction
as he thinks fit to the Line Ministry.
(8) Where a Line Ministry fails to comply with a direction of the
Minister under subsection (7) within the time prescribed in the direction,
(a) the Director may carry out the task required in the
direction;
(b) the Minister may report the failure of the Line Ministry
to the Council for consideration.
(9) A Line Ministry shall -
(a) have all the powers conferred on an environmental
inspector under sections 23(3), 24(3), 50(1) and (2) and
90 of this Act;
(b) make available to other Line Ministries and the Department all facilities required for carrying out any environmental monitoring, laboratory analysis and tests;
(c) keep a record of all inspections and compliance monitoring exercises and information and environmental
data as a result of such monitoring;
324
(d) at the Minister’s request, provide the Minister with a
copy of the record.
PART IV - ENVIRONMENTAL PLANNING
Environment planning at national level
16. (1) The Director shall, in every five years, prepare, in consultation
with relevant Line Ministries, a National Environmental Action Plan, which
shall be submitted to Cabinet for consideration and approval.
(2) The National Environmental Action Plan shall -
(a) be the basis for national environment planning and
implementation of development programmes;
(b) provide general guidance for the management and protection of the environment and natural resources of
Lesotho;
(c) identify the principal environmental problems facing
Lesotho;
(d) recommend methods for building national awareness
on the importance of sustainable use of the environment
and natural resources for national development;
(e) take into account District Environment Action Plans as
provided for under section 17;
(f) identify and recommend policy and legislative approaches
for preventing, controlling or mitigating specific as well
as general adverse impacts on the environment;
(g) be disseminated to the public; and
(h) provide for any other matter that the Minister may prescribe.
(3) The National Environment Action Plan shall be binding on all
325
Government Ministries, parastatals, non-governmental organisations, public
agencies, companies, body corporate and all persons.
Environmental planning at district level
17. (1) A District Development Coordinating Committee shall in consultation with the Director and in addition to its existing role -
(a) prepare every five years, a District Environment Action
Plan;
(b) coordinate the activities of Line Ministries in the protection and management of the environment and conservation and sustainable utilization of natural resources
in the district; and
(c) promote and disseminate information relating to the
environment through public awareness programmes
and prepare reports on the state of the environment in
the district every five years.
(2) The District Environmental Action Plan shall -
(a) be in conformity with the National Environmental
Action Plan;
(b) identify environmental problems in the district in question and shall be binding on all district local communities, and persons within the district;
(c) be disseminated to the public; and
(d) contain such matters as may be prescribed for under
this Act.
(3) A District Development Coordinating Committee shall -
(a) report to the Director on all matters relating to the environment and conservation and utilization of natural
resources in the district under its jurisdiction; and
326
(b) submit such reports as the Director may require.
Environmental management plans
18. (1) Every Line Ministry shall prepare an environmental management plan within such a period as the Minister may specify.
(2) An environmental plan prepared in terms of subsection (1)
shall contain the following -
(a) a description of the functions exercised by the relevant
Ministry in respect of the environment;
(b) a description of environmental standards or guidelines
established or applied by the Line Ministry;
(c) a description of the policies, plans and programmes
that are designed to give effect to the plan;
(d) the degree of compliance required of other persons; and
(e) arrangements for cooperation with other persons on
environmental management.
PART V - ENVIRONMENT IMPACT ASSESSMENT, AUDIT AND
MONITORING
Types of projects for which an environment impact assessment or strategic environment assessment is required
19. (1) An environment impact assessment or project brief, as the case
may be, shall be undertaken on projects and activities specified in Part A of the
First Schedule.
(2) A strategic environmental assessment shall be undertaken on
matters specified in Part B of the First Schedule.
(3) Notwithstanding subsection (1), the Minister may by regulations, prescribe -
327
(a) the category of projects or activities for which only a
project brief is required by reason of their nature,
scope, scale and location;
(b) the category of projects or activities for which an environmental impact assessment study is required by reason of their nature, scope, scale and location.
(4) The Minister may, by notice published in the Gazette, amend
the First Schedule to this Act.
Submission of a project brief
20. (1) A developer shall, prior to commencing, carrying out, executing or conducting a project or activity specified in Part A of the First Schedule,
submit to the Director and the relevant Line Ministry a project brief stating -
(a) the nature of the project;
(b) the activities that shall be undertaken;
(c) the possible products or by-products anticipated and
their environmental consequences;
(d) the number of people the project shall employ;
(e) the area of land, air or water that may be affected;
(f) any other matters that may be prescribed;
(g) and such other matters as the Director may in writing
require from the developer or any other person who the
Director reasonably believes has information relating
to the project.
(2) Where, upon examining the project brief, the Director considers that further information is required to be stated in the project brief, the
Director may require the developer, in writing, to provide such further information as the Director deems necessary.
328
(3) If after considering the project brief, the Director, in consultation with the Line Ministry is of the view that the proposed project will not
have any significant impact on the environment, he may approve the project or
activity with such conditions as he deems appropriate.
(4) The Director may, where he is of the view that the project or
activity is likely to have significant impact on the environment invite written
or oral comments from the public thereon and where necessary may consult the
community of the areas where the proposed project will be situated, of the proposed project and the contents of the project brief.
(5) Notwithstanding section 19(3)(a), the Director may, after considering the project brief, and in consultation with the Line Ministry, require
that an environmental impact study be made in accordance with the provisions
of this Act, if he is of the opinion that the project is likely to have significant
impact on the environment.
Environmental impact studies and statements
21. (1) A developer applying for an environmental impact assessment
licence in respect of a project or activity which an environmental impact
assessment study is required or where the Director has determined in accordance with section 20(5) that an environmental impact study should be undertaken, the developer shall make an environmental impact study and submit an
environmental impact statement on the completion of the study.
(2) The developer shall within 30 days of completing the environmental impact study submit the environmental impact statement relating to the
study to the Director and the relevant Line Ministry.
(3) The environment impact statement shall be open for public
inspection and may be inspected on payment of the prescribed fees by any person at a place and time to be determined by the Minister.
(4) The Director shall prepare guidelines concerning the conduct
of environmental impact studies and the preparation of environmental impact
statements.
(5) Without prejudice to the generality of what may be included in
an environmental study conducted according to subsection (4) of this section,
329
the environmental impact statement shall provide for the following -
(a) a detailed description of the proposed project or activity
and of activities it is likely to generate;
(b) a description of the potentially affected environment
including specific information necessary for identifying
and assessing the environmental effects of the proposed
project or activity;
(c) a description of the technology, method and processes
that shall be used in the implementation of the project
or activities and the main alternatives and reasons for
declining to use those alternatives;
(d) reasons for selecting the proposed site and rejecting
alternative sites;
(e) environmental impact of the proposed activity or project
including the direct, indirect, cumulative, short term or
long term effects on the environment of the project;
(f) an identification and description of measures proposed
for eliminating, minimizing or mitigating the anticipated
adverse effects of the project or activity on the environment;
(g) an indication of whether the environment of any other
State or area beyond the limits of national jurisdiction
is likely to be affected and the mitigating measures to
be undertaken;
(h) a brief description of how the information provided for
in this section has been generated;
(i) an identification of gaps in knowledge and uncertainties which were encountered in completing the required
information;
(j) the social, economic and cultural effects the project is
330
likely to have on people and society;
(k) the irreversible and irretrievable commitment of resources which will be involved by the project if implemented in the manner proposed by the developer;
(l) a comprehensive mitigation plan;
(m) any other matters that the Minister may prescribe.
(6) A comprehensive mitigation plan shall include -
(a) a full description of the mitigation measures that will
be implemented in order to prevent, reduce or otherwise manage the environmental effects of the project.
(b) how the measures referred to in paragraph (a) will be
implemented; and
(c) any other information that the Minister may prescribe.
(7) Experts whose names and qualifications are approved by the
Director after consultation with the relevant Line Ministry shall undertake an
environmental impact study.
(8) Costs of conducting the environmental impact study shall be
borne by the developer.
Review of Environmental impact statements
22. The Director may, on receipt of the environmental impact statement
submitted to him in accordance with section 21 and in consultation with the
relevant Line Ministry, study the environmental impact statement and if he
deems it proper in its form and content shall -
(a) invite public comments on the environment impact
statement in general;
(b) invite the comment of those persons who are most likely to be affected by the proposed project by specifical331
ly drawing their attention to the environmental impact
statement;
(c) consider the environmental impact statement and all
the comments made;
(d) require the holding of a public hearing for persons most
likely to be affected by the proposed project or activity
if he deems it necessary;
(e) approve the project or activity after consultation with
the relevant Line Ministry if he is satisfied that the
project or activity shall not result in significant damage
to the environment;
(f) require the developer to redesign the project or do such
other thing as the Director considers necessary, taking
into consideration the suggestions or comments made
and all environmental factors; or
(g) reject the project where he is of the opinion that the
project may cause significant and irreversible damage
to the environment.
Environmental monitoring
23. (1) The Director shall, in consultation with the relevant Line
Ministry, monitor -
(a) all environmental elements with a view of making an
assessment of a possible change in the environment
and their possible environmental impacts;
(b) the operation of an industry, project or activity with a
view to determining its immediate and long-term
effects on the environment; and
(c) the operation of all projects in existence at and after the
commencement of this Act with a view of determining
whether they comply with the provisions of this Act.
332
(2) The Director may, where he determines that the project does
not comply with the provisions of this Act, require that the developer of a project or activity take remedial measures in a manner and within such time as the
Director may determine.
(3) An environmental inspector may enter upon any land or premises for the purpose of monitoring environmental effects upon the environment
or any activities that are carried out on that land or premises.
Environmental audit
24. (1) The Director shall, in consultation with the relevant Line
Ministry, be responsible for carrying out periodic environmental audit of activities or projects that are likely to have adverse effects on the environment.
(2) The Director may require -
(a) the holder of an environmental impact assessment
licence;
(b) the operator or developer of a project or activity for
which an environmental impact statement has been
made; or
(c) a person who has legal right in land or the owner of the
premises where a project or activity for which environmental impact statements has been made,
to keep and submit to the Director reports on how far the project or activity
conforms in operation with the terms and conditions of the licence at such periods as the Director deems necessary.
(3) An environmental inspector may enter any land or premises for
the purposes of determining how far the activities carried out on that land or
premises conform with the statements made in the environmental impact statement issued in respect of that land or those premises.
(4) A person who has a legal right in the land or the owner of the
premises or a developer of a project or activity for which an environmental
impact statement has been made, shall take all reasonable measures to mitigate
333
undesirable effects not contemplated in the environmental impact statement
and shall report those measures to the Director annually or whenever the
Director requires.
Environmental impact assessment licence and record of decision
25. (1) No person shall operate, execute or carry out a project or activity specified in the First Schedule without an environmental impact assessment
licence issued by the Director.
(2) The Director may, if he is satisfied that the environmental
impact statement is adequate, issue an environmental impact assessment
licence on the terms and conditions appropriate and necessary to facilitate sustainable development and sound environmental management.
(3) The Director shall, in issuing or refusing to issue a licence
under this section, issue a record of decision which shall include:
(a) the decision of the Director;
(b) key factors of that decision including responses to
material issues raised by any person during the environmental impact assessment process;
(c) the date of the decision;
(d) a copy of the environmental impact assessment licence
if issued;
(e) information with respect to the right of any person to
seek reconsideration of the decision of the Director
and how such reconsideration may be sought.
(4) No licensing authority appointed under any other law shall
issue a licence or permit by virtue of any law with respect to a project or activity for which environmental impact assessment may be required unless the
application for a licence is accompanied by an environmental impact assessment licence issued under this Act, or the Director has certified in writing that
an environmental impact assessment is not required under this Act.
334
(5) A person aggrieved by the decision of the Director to issue or
refuse to issue a licence under this section may, within 30 days of being
informed of that decision, request in writing setting forth the reasons of his
request that, the Director reconsider his decision.
(6) The Director shall within 30 days of receipt of a written request
for reconsideration under this section, issue a decision affirming, modifying or
reversing his earlier decision. The decision of the Director shall become part
of the record of decision.
(7) A person who contravenes the provisions of subsection (1),
commits an offence and is liable on conviction to a fine not less than M5,000
or to imprisonment for a term not less than 2 years or to both.
Submission of environmental impact assessment report after issue of environmental impact assessment licence
26. (1) The Director may, after the issue of an environmental impact
assessment licence, direct the holder of a licence to submit fresh environmental impact statement, where -
(a) there is a substantial change or modification in the
project or in the manner in which the project is being
operated; or
(b) the project poses environmental threat, which could not
be reasonably foreseen at the time of the first study.
(2) A person being a holder of an environmental impact assessment licence who fails to comply with the direction issued under subsection
(1) -
(a) commits an offence and is liable on conviction to a fine
not less than M5,000 or to imprisonment for a term not
less than 2 years or to both; and
(b) shall have his environmental impact assessment
licence canceled.
335
Transfer of environmental impact assessment licence
27. (1) The holder of an environmental impact assessment licence may
transfer it to another person only in respect of the project in relation to which
the licence was issued.
(2) Where the licence referred to in subsection (1) is transferred,
the person to whom it was issued to and the person to whom it is transferred
to, shall jointly and in writing notify the Director of the transfer, within 30 days
of the transfer.
(3) The holder of the environmental impact assessment licence
shall, where no joint notification of a transfer is given be deemed for the purposes of this Act to be the owner or the person having charge, or management
or control of the project.
(4) A transfer of an environmental impact assessment licence shall
be effective from the date the Director is notified of the transfer.
(5) No person shall transfer an environmental impact assessment
licence contrary to the provisions of subsections (1), (2) and (3).
(6) A person who contravenes the provisions of this section, commits an offence and is liable on conviction to a fine not less than M5,000 or to
imprisonment for a term not less than 2 years or to both.
PART VI - ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY STANDARDS
Water quality standards
28. (1) The Director shall, in consultation with the relevant Line
Ministry -
(a) establish criteria and procedures for the measurement
of water quality;
(b) establish minimum water quality standards for all the
waters of Lesotho and for the following different uses -
(i) drinking water;
336
(ii) water for industrial purposes;
(iii) water for agricultural purposes;
(iv) water for recreational purposes;
(v) water for fisheries;
(vi) water for wildlife; and
(vii) any other water uses which may be prescribed;
(c) determine conditions for the discharge of effluents into
the aquatic environment;
(d) make guidelines for the preservation of fishing areas,
aquatic areas, and other areas where water may need
special protection;
(e) identify areas of research and initiate or commission
research on the effects of water pollution on the environment, human beings and fauna and flora;
(f) order or carry out investigations of actual or suspected
water pollution including the collection of data;
(g) document the analytical methods by which water quality and pollution control standards can be determined;
(h) collect, maintain and interpret data from industries and
local authorities on the pre-treatment nature and levels
of effluents;
(i) prescribe measures for the treatment of effluent before
discharging it into the sewerage systems;
(j) establish standards for the discharge of effluent into
waters of Lesotho;
(k) recommend the undertaking by a plant operator, of
337
works necessary for the treatment of effluent before it
is discharged into the waters; and
(l) do or perform anything or act necessary for the monitoring and control of water pollution.
(2) The Director may, in consultation with the relevant Line
Ministry, prescribe different quality standards to apply in different areas of
Lesotho with respect to different segments of the environment and the Director
may, from time to time, vary such standards.
(3) A person who contravenes the provisions of this section commits an offence and is liable on conviction to a fine not less than M5, 000 or to
imprisonment for a term not less than 2 years or to both.
Air quality standards
29. (1) The Director shall, in consultation with the relevant Line
Ministry -
(a) establish criteria for the measurement of air quality;
(b) establish -
(i) ambient air quality standards;
(ii) occupational air quality standards;
(iii) emission standards for various sources;
(vi) criteria and guidelines for air pollution control
for both mobile and stationary sources; and
(v) any other air quality standards, which may be
prescribed from, time to time;
(c) take measures to reduce existing sources of air pollution by requiring the redesign of plants or the installation of new technology or both in order to meet the
requirements of standards established under this sec338
tion;
(d) make guidelines to minimize emissions of green house
gases and identify suitable technologies to minimize air
pollution;
(e) consider the rate of emission concentration and nature
of pollutants emitted;
(f) consider the best practicable technology available in
controlling pollutants during the emission process;
(g) determine the analytical technology available in controlling pollutants during the emission process;
(h) order or carry out investigations of actual or suspected
air pollution including pollution produced by aircraft,
motor vehicles, factories and power generating stations;
(i) order an industry or any other source of air pollution to
file returns and provide any information as it may
require; and
(j) do any other thing, which may be necessary for the
monitoring and controlling of air pollution.
(2) No person shall emit or cause to emit a substance, which causes air pollution in contravention of emissions standards, established under this
Act.
(3) A person who contravenes the provisions of subsection (2),
commits an offence and is liable on conviction to a fine not less than M5,000
or to imprisonment for a term not less than 2 years or to both.
(4) A person who is convicted under subsection (3) shall in addition to a fine or imprisonment -
(a) pay the costs which may be incurred by any Line
Ministry or the Department in the restoration of the
environment damaged or destroyed as a result of the
339
emission; and
(b) pay the costs incurred by a third party in the form of
reparation, restoration, restitution or compensation as
may be determined by a court of law.
Standards for waste
30. (1) The Director shall, in consultation with the relevant Line
Ministry -
(a) prescribe standards for waste, waste classification and
analysis and formulate and advise on standards of disposal methods and means for such waste;
(b) issue guidelines for the handling, storage, transportation, segregation and destruction of hazardous waste;
(c) identify materials and processes that are dangerous to
human health and the environment; and
(d) issue guidelines and prescribe measures necessary for
the management of the materials and processes identified under paragraph (c).
(2) A person who contravenes the standards or guidelines made
under this section, commits an offence and is liable on conviction to a fine not
less than M5,000 or to imprisonment for a term not less than 2 years or to both.
Soil quality standards
31. (1) The Director shall, in consultation with the relevant Line
Ministry -
(a) establish -
(i) criteria and procedures for the measurement
and determination of soil quality;
(ii) minimum standards for the management of the
340
quality of the soil;
(b) issue guidelines for -
(i) the disposal of any substance in the soil;
(ii) the optimum manner for the utilization of any
soil;
(iii) the identification of the various soils;
(iv) the practices that will conserve the soil; and
(v) the prohibition of practices that will degrade
the soil;
(c) do any other thing necessary for the monitoring and
controlling of soil degradation.
(2) No person shall use or dispose of soil contrary to the established standards for the management of the quality of soil or guidelines issued
pursuant to this section.
(3) A person who contravenes the provisions of subsection (2),
commits an offence and is liable on conviction to a fine not less than M5,000
or to imprisonment for a term not less than 2 years or to both.
Standards for noise
32. (1) The Director shall, in consultation with the relevant Line
Ministry -
(a) set minimum standards for emissions of noise and
vibration pollution into the environment;
(b) establish criteria and procedures for the measurement
of noise and vibration pollution into the environment
from existing and future sources;
(c) establish criteria and procedures for the measurement
341
of sub-sonic vibrations;
(d) issue guidelines for the minimization of sub-sonic
vibrations referred to in paragraph (b);
(e) establish standards for the emission of sub-sonic vibrations, which are likely to have significant impact on the
environment;
(f) establish noise levels and noise emission standards
applicable to construction sites, plants, machinery,
motor vehicles, aircraft including sonic bonus, industrial and commercial activities;
(g) supply appropriate measures to ensure the abatement
and control of noise from sources referred to in paragraph (f);
(h) measure the levels of noise emanating from sources
referred to in paragraph (f); and
(i) establish guidelines for the abatement of unreasonable
noise or vibration pollution emitted into the environment from any source.
(2) The measurement of the levels of noise emanating from sources
referred to in paragraph (f) shall be given to the owner or occupier of the premises from which the noise is emanating.
Standards for ionization and other radiation
33. (1) The Director shall, in consultation with the relevant Line
Ministry -
(a) establish the standards for the minimization of ionizing
and other radiation in the environment;
(b) establish criteria and procedures for the measurement
of ionizing and other radiation;
342
(c) request inspection and examination of an area, place or
premises or vehicle or any vessel in or upon which the
Director has reasonable cause to believe that radioactive material or any source of ionizing radiation is
stored, leased, transported or disposed of;
(d) where there is reasonable cause to believe that a person
is -
(i) contaminated with radioactive material, or
(ii) in unlawful possession of an ionizing radiation
source,
request that the person be examined;
(e) collect information which the Director must disseminate to the public in order to warn and protect the public in case of actual or potential public exposure to
radioactive material, ionizing radiation or the environment;
(f) conduct an ionizing radiation control and protection
measures; and
(g) do all things necessary for the monitoring and control
of pollution from radiation.
(2) A person who contravenes the standards made under this section, commits an offence and is liable on conviction to a fine not less than
M5,000 or to imprisonment for a term not less than 2 years or to both.
Standards for the control of noxious smells
34. (1) The Director shall, in consultation with the relevant Line
Ministry establish -
(a) procedures for the measurement and determination of
noxious smells;
343
(b) minimum standards for the control of pollution of the
environment by noxious smells; and
(c) guidelines for measures for the abatement of obnoxious
smells, whether from human activities or from naturally occurring phenomena.
(2) A person who contravenes the standards or guidelines made
under this section, commits an offence and is liable on conviction to a fine not
less than M5,000 or to imprisonment for a term not less than 2 years or to both.
Guidelines for environmental disasters
35. (1) The Director shall, in consultation with the relevant Line
Ministry, prepare guidelines for the management of environmental disasters
including -
(a) major oil spills and gas leakages;
(b) spills of hazardous substances;
(c) industrial accidents;
(d) natural disasters including floods, droughts and major
pests infestation, or other intrusion of alien species of
fauna and flora; and
(e) fire.
(2) A person who contravenes the standards or guidelines made
under this section, commits an offence and is liable on conviction to a fine not
less than M5,000 or to imprisonment for a term not less than 2 years or to both.
Other standards
36. (1) The Director shall, in consultation with the relevant Line
Ministry -
(a) establish standards for -
344
(i) buildings and other structures;
(ii) industrial products;
(iii) materials used in industry, agriculture and for
domestic uses;
(iv) solid waste; and
(v) such other matters and activities that may affect
the environment; and
(b) establish criteria and procedures as it may consider
necessary for the determination of the standards
referred to in paragraph (a).
(2) A person who contravenes the standards or guidelines made
under this section, commits an offence and is liable on conviction to a fine not
less than M5,000 or to imprisonment for a term not less than 2 years or to both.
PART VII - POLLUTION CONTROL
Prohibition of discharge of hazardous substances, chemicals and materials or oil into the environment and spillers liability
37. (1) No person shall discharge any hazardous substance, chemical,
oil or mixture containing oil in any waters or any other segment of the environment except in accordance with guidelines prescribed by the Director in
consultation with the relevant Line Ministry.
(2) A person who discharges a hazardous substance, chemical, oil
or mixture containing oil into any waters of other segment of the environment
contrary to subsection (1), commits an offence and is liable on conviction to a
fine not less than M5,000 or to imprisonment for a term not less than 2 years
or to both.
(3) Upon conviction, the person discharging a hazardous substance, chemical, oil or a mixture containing oil into the environment may, in
addition to any other sentence imposed by the court -
345
(a) pay the cost of the removal, including any costs which
may be incurred by the Department or any Line
Ministry, agency or organ in the restoration of the environment damaged or destroyed as a result of the discharge; and
(b) the cost of the third parties in the form of reparation,
restoration, restitution or compensation as may, from
time to time, be determined by a court of law.
(4) The owner or operator of a production or storage facility, motor
vehicle or vessel from which a discharge occurs contrary to this section shall
mitigate the impact of the discharge by -
(a) giving immediate notice of the discharge, to the
Director and other relevant Line Ministries;
(b) immediately commencing clean-up operations using
the best available clean-up methods;
(c) complying with such directions as the Minister may,
from time to time, prescribe.
(5) The Director may seize the production facility, motor vehicle
or vessel until the owner or operator takes mitigation measures.
(6) The Director may dispose of production or storage facility, vessel or motor vehicle seized in accordance with subsection (5) to meet the cost
of clean-up and restoration measures where the owner, after a passage of a reasonable time, fails to take the necessary measures.
Prohibition of pollution
38. (1) No person shall pollute or permit any other person to pollute
the environment in excess of any standards or guidelines established under this
Act.
(2) A person who pollutes or permits any other person to pollute
the environment in excess of any standards and guidelines established under
this Act, commits an offence and is liable on conviction to a fine not less than
346
M5,000 or to imprisonment for a term not less than 2 years or to both.
(3) A person who pollutes or permits any other person to pollute
the environment otherwise than in accordance with this Act may be required
by the Director to clean-up, remove or dispose of the pollutant in such manner
and within such period as the Director may direct.
(4) In addition to any sentence that may be imposed upon a polluter under subsection (2), the court may require such person to -
(a) pay the full cost of cleaning up the environment and of
removing the effects of the pollution; or
(b) clean up the environment and remove the effects of the
pollution.
(5) Without prejudice to the provisions of subsections (2) and (3),
the court may also require the polluter to meet the costs of the pollution to third
parties through compensation, restoration or restitution.
Water pollution prohibited
39. (1) No person shall discharge any poisonous, toxic, exotoxic,
obnoxious substance, or any matter which is likely to cause harm to human
health or aquatic environment into any waters.
(2) A person who discharges or permits any person to discharge
into the waters of Lesotho, contrary to the water pollution standards established under this Act, a poisonous, toxic, exotoxic, obnoxious substance or any
matter which is likely to cause harm to human health or aquatic environment,
commits an offence and is liable on conviction to a fine not less than M5,000
or to imprisonment for a term not less than 2 years or to both.
(3) Subsections (1) and (2) shall not apply to a substance discharged into any water in Lesotho for purposes of treating the water or aquatic life.
(4) A person who is convicted under subsection (2) shall, in addition to a fine stipulated in that subsection -
347
(a) pay the costs incurred by the Department or Line
Ministry or organ for the restoration of the environment damaged or destroyed as a result of his activities;
and
(b) pay the costs incurred by a third party in the form of
reparation, restoration, restitution or compensation as
may be determined by a court of law.
Effluents to be discharged only into sewerage system and effluent discharge licence
40. (1) A person who owns or operates a trade or industrial undertaking shall discharge any effluent or other pollutants originating from the trade
or industrial undertaking into a sewerage system.
(2) A person who, at the commencement of this Act, owns or operates a trade or industrial undertaking shall, within 12 months of the coming
into operation of this Act discharge any effluent or other pollutants originating
from the trade or industrial undertaking into the sewerage system.
(3) A person who owns or operates a trade or industrial undertaking shall, before discharging any effluents or pollutants into the sewerage system, apply in writing to the Director for a licence to discharge the effluents or
pollutant into the sewerage systems.
(4) An effluent licence shall be valid for a period of one year from
the date of issue.
(5) For every issue or renewal of an effluent discharge licence the
licensee shall pay to the Director a prescribed fee.
(6) A person who contravenes the provisions of subsections (1),
(2) and (3), commits an offence and is liable on conviction to a fine not less
than M5,000 or to imprisonment for a term not less than 2 years or to both.
(7) The Minister may, by notice published in the Gazette, prescribe
such fees as he deems necessary for the monitoring, cleaning up, removing or
disposing of pollutants discharged or emitted in the environment.
348
Duty to supply information to environmental inspectors
41. (1) A person who owns or operates an irrigation project scheme,
sewerage system, industrial production plant, workshop or any other undertaking which discharges or is likely to discharge effluents or other pollutants into
the environment shall submit to the Director or environmental inspector accurate information about the quality of such effluent or other pollutants.
(2) A person who at the commencement of this Act owns or operates an irrigation project scheme, sewerage system, industrial production plant,
workshop or any undertaking which discharges or is likely to discharge effluents or other pollutants into the environment, shall within 3 months of the coming into operation of this Act submit to the Director or an environmental
inspector accurate information about the quality and quantity of such effluent
or other pollutants.
(3) A person who contravenes the provisions of this section, commits an offence and is liable on conviction to a fine not less than M5,000 or to
imprisonment for a term not less than 2 years or to both.
Cancellation of effluent discharge licence
42. The Director may, in consultation with the Line Ministry and in writing, cancel an effluent discharge licence -
(a) if the holder of the licence contravenes the provisions of this
Act or regulations made pursuant to this Act;
(b) if the holder fails to comply with any conditions specified in
the licence; or
(c) if the Director considers it in the interest of the environment or
in the public interest.
Register of effluent discharge licence
43. (1) The Director shall maintain a register of all effluent discharge
licences issued under this Act.
349
(2) The register shall be a public document and may be inspected
at any reasonable time by any person and on the payment of the prescribed
fees.
Pollution licence
44. (1) No person shall carry out any project or activity, which is likely to pollute the environment in excess of any standards or guidelines issued
under this Act unless he is in possession of pollution licence.
(2) A person who, at the commencement of this Act is carrying on
a project or activity which is likely to pollute the environment in excess of any
standards or guidelines prescribed under this Act shall, within 12 months of the
coming into operation of this Act apply for a pollution licence.
(3) An application for a pollution licence shall be made in writing
to the Director in the prescribed form.
(4) A pollution licence shall be in a prescribed form and subject to
conditions as may be prescribed or specified in the licence.
(5) An application for a pollution licence shall be accompanied by
the prescribed fee.
(6) The Director may, where he rejects an application for a pollution licence, state in writing the reasons for rejecting the application.
(7) A pollution licence shall be valid for a period of one year from
the date of issue.
(8) The Director may, before issuing a pollution licence -
(a) consider the possible effects of the emission on the
quality of ambient air;
(b) consider existing licences affecting the same air
resource;
(c) give due regard to the requirements of the residents,
human settlements and other industrial and commercial
350
activities;
(d) solicit the comments of local authorities and concerned
Ministries or organisations;
(e) where the information accompanying the application
appears inadequate, require the applicant to furnish fur
ther information relating to the project or activity in
question, its location, materials, technology design or
other appropriate matters; or
(f) where it appears necessary to conduct an environmental impact assessment study, require the applicant to
conduct an environmental impact assessment study in
respect of that project or activity.
(9) The fee to be charged under this section shall be determined in
accordance with the polluter pays principle referred to in section 4 of this Act.
(10) A person contributing the greater amount of pollution shall
bear the largest burden in paying for cleaning the environment.
(11) A person who contravenes the provisions of this sections commits an offence and is liable on conviction to a fine not less than M10,000 or
to imprisonment for a term not less than 3 years or to both.
Emissions by conveyance
45. (1) A person who -
(a) owns or operates a motor vehicle, train, boat or aircraft
or any similar conveyance shall not operate it contrary
to the established emission standards; or
(b) imports machinery, equipment or any similar device
which is likely to cause emissions into the ambient air
shall not import it contrary to the prescribed emission
standards for the machinery, equipment, or any similar
device.
351
(2) A person who contravenes the provisions of this section commits an offence and is liable on conviction to a fine not less than M5,000 or to
imprisonment for a term not less than 2 years or to both.
Additional licensing procedure
46. The Director may establish additional procedure for the application
and issue of a pollution licence.
Noise in excess of established standards prohibited
47. (1) No person shall emit or cause to emit noise in excess of the
noise emission standards established under section 32 of this Act.
(2) A person who contravenes the provisions of subsection (1)
commits an offence and is liable on conviction to a fine not less than M5,000
or to imprisonment for a term not less than 2 years or to both.
Exemptions
48. (1) Notwithstanding the provisions of section 47, the Director may
on request by any person issue a permit in writing, allowing excessive emission of noise under such terms and conditions as the Director may determine.
(2) Where an exemption has been given under subsection (1), a
worker exposed to excessive levels of noise shall be adequately protected in
accordance with the directives issued by the Director.
Offences relating to ionizing radiation
49. (1) No person shall import, process, mine, export, possess, transport, use or dispose of radioactive materials or other sources of dangerous radiation unless he holds an ionizing radiation licence issued under this Act or the
regulations made under this Act.
(2) An ionizing radiation licence issued under this section shall be
valid for 1 year.
(3) A person issued an ionizing radiation licence shall pay the prescribed fee for the ionizing radiation licence.
352
(4) A person who contravenes the provisions of subsection (1)
commits an offence and is liable on conviction to a fine not less than M5,000
or to imprisonment for a term not less than 2 years or to both.
(5) Where a person is convicted in respect of this section, the environmental inspector may, in addition to the penalties provided in subsection
(4), seize, impound, destroy or dispose of radioactive materials or other source
of dangerous ionizing radiation in such manner as the court may consider necessary to protect the public and the environment, or return them to the owner
on orders of the court and under any other conditions set out in the licence
issued by the Director.
Powers of inspectors relating to ionizing radiation
50. (1) An environmental inspector may -
(a) enter, inspect and examine a place, area, premises,
vehicle, vessel or a conveyance of any description on
which he has reasonable grounds to believe that radioactive materials or any source of ionizing radiation is
stored, used, transported or disposed of; or
(b) order presentation of a licence authorising the possession or use of radioactive material or sources of dangerous ionizing radiation.
(2) Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph (a) of subsection
(1), an environment inspector shall not enter a private dwelling house unless
he has obtained a court order authorising him to enter, inspect and examine the
private dwelling house.
Offences relating to noxious smell
51. (1) No person shall pollute the environment with noxious smells
contrary to the established standards for the control of noxious smells.
(2) A person who contravenes the provisions of subsection (1)
commits an offence and is liable on conviction liable to a fine not less than
M5,000 or to imprisonment for a term not less than 2 years or to both.
353
PART VIII- SPILL AND ENVIRONMENTAL EMERGENCY
Duty to notify the Director
52. (1) An environmental unit, an officer of a Line Ministry or of a
local authority who is informed of a spill, shall notify the Director of the spill.
(2) An owner of a pollutant which is spilled shall forthwith -
(a) notify the Director of the spill;
(b) inform the Director of -
(i) the circumstances of the spill;
(ii) any action taken or proposed to be taken in relation to the spill;
(c) do everything possible to -
(i) prevent, or eliminate the adverse effects of the
spill; and
(ii) restore the environment to the way it was
before the spill.
Measures taken by Director
53. (1) Where the owner of a pollutant which is spilled -
(a) is reasonably suspected of contravening section 52(2)(c);
(b) cannot promptly be identified;
(c) requests the assistance of the Director in relation to a
spill,
the Director may initiate any action and take any measures necessary in the
public interest to prevent and eliminate the adverse effects on the environment
and to restore the environment to the way it was before the spill.
354
(2) In the event of a spill, the Director may order the owner of the
pollutant which is spilled, to take such action, within such period as he may
specify in order to -
(a) prevent or eliminate the adverse environmental effects;
(b) restore the environment to the way it was
before the spill; or
(c) dispose of or deal with the pollutant or any
object reasonably suspected to be affected by
the pollutant.
(3) The Director may direct any person conducting an activity
which may, in the Director’s opinion, cause a spill -
(a) to prepare a contingency plan satisfactory to the
Director;
(b) to make such modification as he thinks appropriate to
an existing plan.
Clean-up and removal operations
54. The Minister may, by notice published in the Gazette, prescribe -
(a) the procedures for clean-up and removal operations in
the event of a spill;
(b) the method of storage and disposal of any pollutant or
any object, plant, animal, or any part of the environment removed in a clean-up or removal operation or
otherwise affected by a pollutant.
Liability for spill
55. (1) A person affected in any way by a spill shall have a right to
claim damages from the owner of a pollutant.
355
(2) For the purpose of an action for damages under this section -
(a) the owner of a pollutant is liable for any damages
caused by a spill; or
(b) a pollutant shall be deemed to be in the custody of the
owner of the pollutant.
(3) Where there are several owners of a pollutant, the action may
be directed against all or any one of them.
(4) Where damage is caused by a spill to the environment, or to
any property, object or thing which is not the subject of private ownership, the
Attorney-General may claim damages against the owner of the pollutant in
accordance with this section.
Recovery of expenses
56. (1) The Director may recover from the owner of a pollutant which
is spilled, all costs and expenses incurred by the Department as a result of -
(a) any clean-up or removal operation;
(b) any measure taken to prevent, eliminate and ameliorate
the adverse effects of a spill on the environment;
(c) any measure taken to dispose of or to deal with the
pollutant.
(2) The costs and expenses referred to in subsection (1) shall be
deemed to be civil debts owed by the owner of a pollutant to the State.
Environmental emergency
57. (1) Notwithstanding any written law to the contrary, where a major
threat to the environment is posed as a result of a spill or otherwise, the Prime
Minister may, in consultation with the Minister, declare an environmental
emergency.
(2) Notwithstanding any written law to the contrary, where an
356
emergency is declared under subsection (1), the Minister may make such order
as he thinks fit to any Line Ministry for the purpose of the protection of the
environment.
(3) The Minister may prepare such contingency plan as is appropriate in the event of an emergency situation.
Powers in case of spill or emergency
58. A person engaged in an action or measure taken by the Minister in the
case of a spill, or in furtherance of an order by the Minister in the case of emergency, may -
(a) without warrant enter any premises and have such
access through or over any building structure, vehicle
or water or air;
(b) construct or set up any structure, machinery, material
and equipment on any premises;
(c) remove the pollutant or any object, plant, animal, to
any part of the environment which is reasonably suspected to be affected by the pollutant; and
(d) stop, inspect, search and detain any vehicle.
PART IX - ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT
Identification and protection of areas
59. (1) Every local authority shall, under its area of jurisdiction, identify areas, which are at risk from environmental degradation.
(2) An area is at risk from environmental degradation if -
(a) it is prone to soil erosion;
(b) vegetation cover has been removed or is likely to be
removed from the area at a rate faster than it is being
replaced; or
357
(c) any other land use activity in that area is likely to lead
to environmental degradation.
(3) Every local authority shall notify the Director of an area it has
identified as being at risk from environmental degradation.
(4) The Director may in consultation with the relevant Line
Ministry, develop, issue and implement procedures, guidelines and measures
necessary for sustainable use of areas identified under subsection (1) after they
have been rehabilitated and the vegetation growing on them and all natural
resources.
(5) The guidelines, procedures and measures referred to in subsection (4) shall provide for -
(a) control of forests and any natural resources located in
or on the hilly or mountainous area;
(b) protection of water catchment area;
(c) prevention of soil erosion;
(d) regulation of human settlement;
(e) appropriate farming methods;
(f) disaster preparedness;
(g) afforestation and reafforestation;
(h) the farming capacity of hilly and mountainous areas in
relation to animal husbandry;
(i) any other measure that the Director may consider necessary.
(6) Every local authority shall ensure that the guidelines issued
and measures prescribed under this section are implemented.
(7) No person shall act or do anything contrary to guidelines or
358
measures prescribed by the Director.
(8) A person who contravenes the provisions of subsection (7)
commits an offence and is liable on conviction to a fine not less than M5,000
or to imprisonment for a term not less than 2 years or to both.
Re-forestation and afforestation
60. (1) Every District Development Coordinating Committee shall
prepare a District Environment Action Plan which must specify which of the
areas identified in accordance with section 59 should be targeted for afforestation or reforestation.
(2) Every local authority shall, through encouraging voluntary
self-help in their respective communities take measures to plant trees and other
vegetation in areas specified under subsection (1) which are within its area of
jurisdiction and not subject to any personal interest in land.
(3) Where the areas specified under subsection (1) are subject to
any personal interest in land, the holder of that interest shall take measures to
plant trees and other vegetation in those areas.
(4) Where a person who has an interest in land fails to comply with
the provisions of subsection (3), the local authority shall determine measures
to ensure compliance.
Protection of rivers, riverbanks, wetlands etc.
61. (1) The Director shall, in consultation with the relevant line
Ministry issue guidelines and prescribe measures for protection of riverbanks,
rivers, wetlands, lakes and lakeshores.
(2) No person shall in relation to a river, riverbank, lake, lakeshore
or wetland and without prior approval of the Director carry out the following
activities -
(a) use, erect, construct, place, alter, extend, remove or
demolish a structure in or under the river, riverbanks,
lake, lakeshore, or wetlands;
359
(b) excavate, drill, tunnel or disturb the river, riverbank,
lake, lakeshore or wetland;
(c) introduce or plant any part of a plant, plant specimen
whether alien or indigenous, dead or alive in a river,
riverbank, lake, lakeshore or wetland;
(d) deposit a substance in a river, riverbank, lake, lakeshore or wetland or in or under its bed, which is likely
to have adverse environmental effects on the river, lake
or wetland;
(e) direct or block a river, lake or wetland from its natural
course; or
(f) drain a river, lake or wetland.
(3) The Minister may by notice published in the Gazette -
(a) declare a river, riverbank, lake, lakeshore or wetland
a protected area; and
(b) impose any restrictions as it considers necessary for the
protection of the river, riverbank, lake, lakeshore and
wetland from environmental degradation.
(4) The Minister may, in declaring a river, riverbank, lake,
lakeshore or wetland a protected area, take into consideration the following -
(a) the geographical size of the river, riverbank, lake,
lakeshore or wetland; and
(b) the interests of the communities resident around the
river, riverbank, lake, lakeshore or wetland concerned.
(5) A person who contravenes the provisions of subsection (1)
commits an offence and is liable on conviction to a fine not less than M5,000
or to imprisonment for a term not less than 2 years or to both.
360
General and specific orders, for standards for the management of river,
riverbanks, lake, lakeshore and wetlands
62. (1) The Minister may by notice in the Gazette publish general or
specific orders, or standards for the management of rivers, riverbanks, lakes,
lakeshores or wetlands.
(2) The orders or standards referred to in subsection (1) may
include protection or conservation measures in respect of any area at risk of
environmental degradation and provide for the following -
(a) measures for the prevention or control of soil erosion;
(b) the conservation of any vegetation growing around a
river, lake or wetlands;
(c) the contingency plan for the prevention and control of
deliberate or accidental discharge of any substance
from any source, which is likely to pollute the river,
wetland or lake;
(d) plans for the protection of wetlands, rivers, and riverbanks, lakes and lakeshores;
(e) the control measures to be taken in harvesting aquatic
living and non-living resources to ensure optimum sustainable yield; and
(f) promotion of environmental friendly tourism.
(3) Notwithstanding the provisions of this section and section 61,
the Minister may authorise sustainable use of river, riverbanks, and lakes,
lakeshores or wetland where such use is not likely to cause adverse effects on
the riverbanks, lakeshore or wetlands.
(4) The Director shall, in consultation with the relevant Line
Ministry, issue guidelines for the management of the environment of rivers and
lakes.
(5) No person shall act contrary to orders, standards and guidelines
361
issued pursuant to subsection (1).
(6) A person who contravenes the provisions of this section commits an offence and is liable on conviction to a fine not less than M5,000 or to
imprisonment for a term not less than 2 years or to both.
Protection of forests
63. (1) The Director shall, in consultation with the relevant Line
Ministry, issue guidelines and prescribe measures for the protection and management of all forests in Lesotho.
(2) The guidelines issued and measures prescribed pursuant to
subsection (1) shall take into account the following -
(a) forests in protected areas, including forest reserves,
national parks and game reserves; and
(b) forests on land subject to interest held by private persons.
(3) All forests shall be managed in accordance with the principle
of sustainable development.
(4) The commercial or industrial exploitation of forests shall be
carried out in accordance with the principle of optimum sustainable use.
(5) Traditional use of forests, which are indispensable to the local
community, shall be carried out in accordance with the principle of sustainable
development.
(6) Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (3), (4) and (5),
the Director may in consultation with the relevant Line Ministries, expressly
exclude human activities in any forest area by declaring a forest area a specially protected forest area.
(7) No person shall act contrary to the guidelines issued and measures prescribed by the Director for the sustainable management of all forests in
Lesotho.
362
(8) A person who contravenes the provisions of subsection (7),
commits an offence and is liable on conviction to a fine not less than M5,000
or to imprisonment for a term not less than 2 years or to both.
Conservation of energy and planting of trees or woodlots
64. The Director shall, in consultation with the relevant Line Ministry -
(a) promote the use of renewable sources of energy by -
(i) promoting research in appropriate renewable
sources of energy;
(ii) creating incentives for the promotion of renewable sources of energy;
(b) promote measures for the conservation of non-renewable sources of energy; and
(c) take measures to encourage the planting of trees and
woodlots by individual users, institutions and by community groups.
Conservation of Biological Diversity
65. (1) The Director shall, in consultation with the relevant Line
Ministry, issue guidelines and prescribe measures for the conservation of biological diversity.
(2) In issuing guidelines under subsection (1), the Director may -
(a) integrate a conservation and sustainable utilization ethic
in relation to biological diversity with existing Government activities and activities of private persons;
(b) specify national strategies, plans and programmes for
the conservation and sustainable use of biological
diversity;
(c) prepare and maintain an inventory of biological diver363
sity of Lesotho;
(d) determine which components of biological resources
are threatened with extinction;
(e) identify actual and potential threats to biological diversity and devise measures to remove or mitigate their
effects; or
(f) prohibit or restrict any trade or traffic in any component
of biological diversity.
(3) A person who contravenes any guidelines or a measure prescribed under this section commits an offence and is liable on conviction to a
fine not less than M5, 000 or to imprisonment for a term not less than 2 years
or to both.
Conservation of biological resources in situ
66. (1) The Director shall, in consultation with the relevant Line
Ministry -
(a) prescribe measures to ensure the conservation of biological resources in situ;
(b) issue guidelines for -
(i) land use methods that are compatible with the
conservation of biological diversity;
(ii) the selection and management of protected
areas so as to promote the conservation of the
various terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems of
Lesotho;
(iii) the selection and management of buffer zones
near protected areas;
(iv) special measures for protection of species,
ecosystems, and habitats faced with extinction;
364
(v) prohibiting or controlling of the introduction of
alien species;
(vi) integrating traditional knowledge for the conservation of biological diversity with mainstream scientific knowledge.
(2) A person who contravenes any guidelines or a measure prescribed under this section commits an offence and is liable on conviction to a
fine not less than M5, 000 or to imprisonment for a term not less than 2 years
or to both.
(3) In this section “in situ” means conservation within the natural
ecosystems and habitat of the biological organism.
Conservation of biological resources ex-situ
67. (1) The Director shall, in consultation with the relevant Line
Ministry -
(a) prescribe measures for the conservation of biological
diversity ex-situ especially for species threatened with
extinction;
(b) issue guidelines for the establishment and operation of -
(i) botanical gardens;
(ii) game parks, and
(iii) any other facilities which the Director may
consider necessary;
(c) ensure that species threatened with extinction which
are conserved ex-situ are re-introduced into their native
habits and ecosystems where -
(i) the threat to the species has been terminated; or
(ii) viable population of the threatened species has
365
been achieved.
(2) A person who contravenes any guidelines or a measure prescribed under this section commits an offence and is liable on conviction to a
fine not less than M5, 000 or to imprisonment for a term not less than 2 years
or to both.
(3) In this section, “ex-situ” means conservation outside the natural habitat of the biological organisms.
Access to genetic resources of Lesotho
68. (1) The Director shall, in consultation with the relevant Line
Ministry, issue guidelines and prescribe measures for the sustainable management and utilization of genetic resources of Lesotho for the benefit of the people of Lesotho.
(2) Without prejudice to subsection (1), guidelines and measures
issued or prescribed pursuant to subsection (1) shall specify -
(a) appropriate arrangements for access to the genetic
resources of Lesotho by non-citizens or non-residents
of Lesotho and fees to be charged for that access;
(b) the sharing of benefits derived from genetic resources
of Lesotho; or
(c) any other matters that the Director may consider necessary for the sound management of the genetic resources
of Lesotho.
(3) A person who contravenes any guidelines or a measure prescribed under this section commits an offence and is liable on conviction to a
fine not less than M5,000 or to imprisonment for a term not less than 2 years
or to both.
Management of rangelands
69. (1) The Director shall, in consultation with the relevant Line
Ministry, issue guidelines and prescribe measures for the sustainable manage366
ment and utilization of rangelands.
(2) In issuing the guidelines and prescribing measures referred to
in subsection (1), the Director shall be guided by -
(a) the carrying capacity of the land;
(b) the conservation of the soil;
(c) the risk to desertification faced by a rangeland; and
(d) any other factor, which the Director may in consultation with the relevant Line Ministry, considers appropriate.
(3) A person who contravenes any guidelines or a measure prescribed under this section, commits an offence and is liable on conviction to a
fine not less than M5,000 or to imprisonment for a term not less than 2 years
or to both.
Land use planning
70. (1) The Director shall, in consultation with the relevant Line
Ministry, issue environmental standards and guidelines in respect of land use
plans.
(2) The Director and the relevant Line Ministry shall monitor the
implementation of a land use plan prepared in accordance with this section.
(3) A person who contravenes any guidelines or standards issued
under this section, commits an offence and is liable on conviction to a fine not
less than M5,000 or to imprisonment for a term not less than 2 years or to both.
Protection of natural heritage sites
71. (1) The Director shall, in consultation with the relevant Line
Ministry -
(a) identify elements, objects and sites in the natural environment, which are of national importance to the peo367
ple of Lesotho;
(b) in such manner as may be prescribed, maintain a register of all elements, objects and sites identified pursuant
to paragraph (a); and
(c) issue guidelines and prescribe measures for the management and protection of cultural elements, objects and
sites registered in accordance with this section.
(2) A person who contravenes any guidelines or a measure prescribed under this section, commits an offence and is liable on conviction to a
fine not less than M5,000 or to imprisonment for a term not less than 2 years
or to both.
Protection of natural environmental areas
72. (1) The Minister may, in consultation with the relevant Line
Ministry, declare by notice in the Gazette, any area of land, river or lake as a
protected natural environment for the purposes of promoting and preserving
specific ecological processes, natural environmental systems, natural beauty or
places of indigenous wildlife or the preservation of biological diversity in general.
(2) The Director shall, in consultation with the relevant Line
Ministry, issue guidelines and prescribe measures for the management and protection of natural environmental areas.
(3) A person who contravenes any guidelines or a measure prescribed under this section, commits an offence and is liable on conviction to a
fine not less than M5,000 or to imprisonment for a term not less than 2 years
or to both.
Protection of the ozone layer
73. (1) The Director shall, in consultation with the relevant Line
Ministry -
(a) undertake or commission other persons to undertake
national studies and give due recognition to develop368
ment in scientific knowledge relating to substances,
activities and practices that deplete the stratospheric
ozone layer and other components of the stratosphere
to the detriment of public health and the environment;
(b) issue guidelines, and institute programmes relating to -
(i) the elimination of substances that deplete the
ozone layer;
(ii) management practices and activities likely to
lead to the degradation of the ozone layer and
the stratosphere; or
(iii) the reduction and minimization of risks to
human health created by the degradation of the
ozone layer and the stratosphere.
(3) A person who contravenes any guidelines or a measure prescribed under this section, commits an offence and is liable on conviction to a
fine not less than M5,000 or to imprisonment for a term not less than 2 years
or to both.
Management of dangerous materials
74. (1) The Director shall, in consultation with the relevant Line
Ministry -
(a) identify materials and processes that are dangerous to human
health or the environment; and
(b) issue guidelines and prescribe measures for the management of
materials and processes identified pursuant to paragraph (a).
(2) A person who contravenes any guidelines or a measure prescribed under this section, commits an offence and is liable on conviction to a
fine not less than M5,000 or to imprisonment for a term not less than 2 years
or to both.
369
Management of hazardous waste
75. (1) The Director shall, in consultation with the relevant Line
Ministry -
(a) adopt standards or criteria for the classification of hazardous wastes with regard to determining -
(i) extremely hazardous waste;
(ii) corrosive waste;
(iii) carcinogenic waste;
(iv) flammable waste;
(v) persistent waste;
(vi) toxic waste;
(vii) explosive waste;
(viii) radioactive waste;
(ix) wastes, reactive otherwise than as described in
the foregoing;
(x) any other category of waste which the Director
may consider necessary.
(2) The Director may, in consultation with the relevant Line
Ministry issue guidelines for the management of each category of hazardous
waste classified under subsection (1).
(3) A person who contravenes any guidelines issued under this
section commits an offence and is liable on conviction to a fine not less than
M10,000 or to imprisonment for a term not less than 3 years or to both.
370
Application for a waste licence
76. (1) No person shall -
(a) own or operate a waste disposal site or plant other than
domestic waste;
(b) generate hazardous waste;
(c) store hazardous waste;
(d) handle or transport hazardous waste;
(e) dispose of hazardous waste;
unless he is in possession of a licence to own or operate a disposal site, generate, store, transport or dispose of hazardous waste.
(2) A person referred to in subsection (1) shall apply in writing to
the Director for a licence, which may be issued on such terms and conditions
as the Director may determine.
(3) A licence issued in respect of subsection (1) may be granted by
the Director subject to any other licence that may be required in terms of this
Act or any other law.
(4) A person whose activities generate waste shall employ measures essential to minimize waste through treatment, determination or recycling.
(5) Where the Director rejects an application for waste licence, the
Director may, in writing, state reasons for rejecting the application.
(6) A person aggrieved by decision of the Director may in writing
appeal to the Tribunal.
(7) A person, who at the commencement of this Act is carrying on
the business or operating a waste disposal site, plant, generating, storing, transporting or disposing hazardous waste, shall, apply in writing to the Director for
a licence under this section within 12 months of the coming into operation of
this Act.
371
(8) The waste licence shall be valid for a period of one year and for
every issue or renewal of a waste licence the licensee shall pay to the Director
the prescribed fee.
(9) A person who contravenes the provisions of this section commits an offence and is liable on conviction to a fine not less than M5,000 or to
imprisonment for a term not less than 5 years or to both.
Importation and exportation of hazardous waste prohibited
77. (1) No person shall import into Lesotho any hazardous waste or
substances.
(2) No person shall export from Lesotho to any country hazardous
waste or substances unless he has a licence issued by the Director.
(3) The exporter of hazardous waste or substance shall before a
licence is issued produce to the Director written confirmation from an appropriate authority of the receiving country that the hazardous waste or substance
may be exported to that country.
(4) No person shall transport within Lesotho hazardous waste or
substances except under a licence issued by the Director subject to such conditions as the Director may impose.
(5) A person who contravenes the provisions of this section commits an offence and is liable on conviction to a fine not less than M20,000 or
to imprisonment for a term not less than 10 years or to both.
(6) Any person who imports any hazardous waste or substance
into Lesotho contrary to subsection (1) shall be responsible for the removal of
the waste from Lesotho and for its safe disposal.
Cancellation of a waste licence
78. The Director may in writing, cancel a waste licence where -
(a) the holder of the licence fails to comply with the conditions
specified in the licence; or
372
(b) the Director considers it in the interest of the environment or
public health or in the public interest.
Court order to cease operation
79. The Director may apply to the High Court for an order compelling a
person to immediately stop waste generation, handling, transportation, storage
or disposal of hazardous waste where such generation, handling, transportation, storage or disposal presents imminent and substantial danger to public
health, the environment or natural resources.
Register of waste licences and other pollution licences
80. (1) The Director shall maintain a register of all waste licences and
any other pollution licence issued pursuant to this Act.
(2) The register referred to in subsection (1) shall be a public document and may be inspected by any person at a reasonable time on the payment of a prescribed fee.
Management of toxic and hazardous chemicals and substances
81. (1) The Director shall, in consultation with the relevant Line
Ministry, issue guidelines, and prescribe measures for the management of toxic
and hazardous substances.
(2) The guidelines issued and measured prescribed pursuant to
subsection (1) may provide for the following -
(a) classification of toxic and hazardous chemicals and
substances;
(b) registration of chemicals and substances;
(c) packaging of chemicals and substances;
(d) advertising of chemicals and substances;
(e) control of imports and exports of toxic or hazardous
chemicals and substances;
373
(f) labeling of chemicals and substances;
(g) distribution, storage, transportation and handling of
toxic and hazardous chemicals and substances;
(h) monitoring of the effects of chemicals and their residue
on human health and the environment;
(i) disposal of expired and surplus chemicals and substances;
(j) disposal of used chemicals and substances; and
(k) restricting or banning of toxic or hazardous chemicals
and substances.
Handling of toxic or hazardous chemicals or substances
82. (1) No person shall handle toxic or hazardous chemicals unless it
is in accordance with the guidelines issued or measures prescribed under section 81.
(2) A person who contravenes the provisions of subsection (1)
commits an offence and is liable on conviction to a fine not less than M20, 000
or to imprisonment for a term not less than 10 years or to both.
(3) In addition to a fine or imprisonment under subsection (2), a
person convicted shall -
(a) pay the costs incurred by the Department or the Line
Ministry or organ in the restoration of the environment
damaged or destroyed as a result of the discharge; or
(b) pay the costs to third parties in the form of reparation,
restoration, restitution or compensation as may be determined by the Director in consultation with the relevant
Line Ministry.
(4) The owner or operator of a production or storage facility, vehicle or conveyance or any other thing from which a discharge occurs contrary
374
to this section shall -
(a) give immediate notice of the discharge, to the Director
and the relevant Line Ministry;
(b) apply clear-up operations using the best clean up methods;
(c) comply with directions that the Director may give.
(5) The Director may seize the production or storage facility, vehicle, conveyance or any other thing from which a discharge occurred until the
owner or operator of that production, storage facility, conveyance or any other
thing from which a discharge occurred has taken measures to mitigate the
impact of the discharge or stop the discharge.
(6) Where the owner or operator fails to take necessary measures
referred to in subsection (4), within a period of 1 month from the date the
Director is notified of the discharge, the Director may apply for court order to
dispose of the production or storage facility conveyance or any other thing
from which the discharge occurred so as to meet the costs of taking the necessary remedial or restoration measures.
Total Ban
83. (1) No person shall import into Lesotho hazardous chemicals and
substances specified in the Second Schedule.
(2) No person shall manufacture, handle, sell or transport hazardous chemicals specified in the Second Schedule.
(3) A person who contravenes the provisions of subsections (1) or
(2), commits an offence and is liable on conviction to a fine of not less than
M10,000 or to imprisonment for a period of not less than 2 years or to both.
(4) A court convicting a person for an offence under this section or
regulations made under this Act may in addition to the penalty prescribed in
subsection (3) order that the toxic or hazardous chemical or substance, which
is the subject of the offence, be confiscated, and direct the manner in which it
should be disposed of.
375
(5) This section shall not apply in relation to Mercury Compounds
used by health institutions for health purposes.
(6) The Minister may, by notice published in the Gazette, amend
the Second Schedule to this Act.
(7) In this section, “health institutions” means pharmaceuticals,
hospitals and clinics.
PART X - ENVIRONMENTAL RESTORATION NOTICE AND ORDER
Environmental restoration notice
84. (1) The Director may issue to any person, in respect of a matter
relating to the management of the environment and natural resources, an environmental restoration notice.
(2) An environmental restoration notice referred to in subsection
(1), may be issued for the following purposes -
(a) requiring the person whose activities have degrading
effect on the environment or natural resources to
restore that environment or natural resources as near as
it may be to the state in which it was before he began
activities which have degrading effect on the environment or natural resources;
(b) preventing the person from taking an action which is
causing or is likely to cause harm to the environment or
natural resources.
(3) An environmental restoration notice may have any terms or
conditions and impose on the person on whom it is served, obligations, which
in the opinion of the Director may enable the notice to achieve the purposes for
which it was issued.
(4) Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, the restoration
notice may require a person on whom it is served to -
(a) take an action, which may prevent the commencement
376
or continuation or the cause of pollution;
(b) restore land, including the replacement of soil, the
replanting of trees and other flora and outstanding geological, archaeological or historical features of the land
or the area to the land specified in the order;
(c) take an action which shall prevent the commencement
or continuation or cause of the environmental hazard;
(d) cease to take an action, which is causing or is likely to
cause pollution or an environment hazard;
(e) remove or alleviate damage to land or the environment
or to the amenities of the areas;
(f) prevent damage to the land or the environment, aquifers
beneath the land and flora and fauna in, on or under the
land specified in the order or land or the environment
contiguous to the land specified in the order; or
(g) remove or dispose of waste or refuse deposited on land
specified in the notice.
(5) The Director shall have power to inspect, at any reasonable
time, any activity on any premises for purposes of determining whether the
activity is harmful to the environment of the conservation of natural resources
or whether to make an environmental restoration notice under subsection (1).
(6) For purposes of subsection (5), the Director may enter any
premises at any reasonable time to enforce the environmental restoration
notice and the Director shall not be responsible for the consequences of any
action reasonably taken by him in good faith under this section.
(7) The Director my delegate the power referred to in subsections
(5) and (6) to an inspector or any person duly authorised by him and anything
done by that person shall be deemed to be done by the inspector or by the
Director and shall be valid for all purposes.
(8) In exercising the powers under this section, the Director shall
377
be guided by the principles of good environmental management specified in
this Act.
(9) A person who fails or refuses to comply with the environmental restoration notice, made under this section commits an offence and is liable
on conviction to imprisonment for a fine not less than M5, 000 or to imprisonment for a term not less than 2 years or to both.
Service of environmental restoration notice
85. (1) Where the Director reasonably suspects that harm has been or
is likely to be caused to the environment by any person’s activity, he may serve
on that person an environmental restoration notice requiring that person to take
action within 21 days of the service of the notice, to remedy or prevent the
harm to the environment as may be specified in the notice.
(2) An environmental restoration notice shall specify clearly and
in a manner that may be precisely understood -
(a) the activity to which it relates;
(b) the person to whom it is addressed;
(c) the time at which it comes into effect;
(d) the action which must be taken to remedy the harm to
the environment;
(e) the time within which the action must be taken;
(f) the powers of the Director to have any of his designated officers to enter any land and undertake the action
specified in paragraph (d);
(g) the penalties which may be imposed if the action specified in paragraph (d) is not undertaken;
(h) the right of the person served with an environmental
restoration notice to appeal to the court or Tribunal
against that notice.
378
(3) The environmental inspector may inspect an activity to determine whether that activity is harmful to the environment or human health.
(4) The Director may -
(a) take into account the findings of the inspection in
determining whether or not to serve an environmental
restoration notice;
(b) seek and take into account technical, professional and
scientific advice, which it considers to be desirable for
a satisfactory decision to be made on an environmental
restoration notice.
(5) An environmental restoration notice shall continue to apply to
the activity in respect of which it was served even if it has been complied with.
(6) A person served with an environmental restoration notice shall
comply with all terms and conditions of the environmental restoration notice
served on him.
(7) A person who is -
(a) involved in an activity which is the subject of the
inspection; or
(b) residing, working on or developing land on which the
activity, which is the subject of the inspection, is taking
place,
is not entitled to a hearing or making representation to the person who is conducting an inspection.
Reconsideration of restoration notice
86. (1) A person who is served with an environmental restoration
notice may, within 21 days of the service of the environmental restoration
notice give in writing, reasons why he is requesting the Director to reconsider
the environmental restoration notice.
379
(2) Where a written request is made as provided for under subsection (1), the environmental restoration notice shall continue to be effective
until varied, suspended or withdrawn.
(3) The Director shall, within 31 days of receiving the request
made in accordance with subsection (1), reconsider the environmental restoration notice and notify in writing the person who made the request of its decision on the environmental restoration notice.
(4) The Director may, after reconsidering the environmental
restoration notice confirm, vary, suspend or withdraw the environmental
restoration notice.
(5) The person who has requested a reconsideration of an environmental restoration notice is entitled to a hearing before a decision is made by
the Director.
Action by the Director in case of non compliance with an environmental
restoration notice
87. (1) Where a person on whom an environmental restoration notice
is served fails, neglects or refuses to comply with the requirements of the
notice, the Director may -
(a) enter or authorise another person to enter any land or
premises under the control of the person on whom the
environmental restoration notice was served; and
(b) take all necessary action in respect of the activity to
which that notice relates,
so as to enforce the notice.
(2) Where the Director exercised the power provided for under
subsection (1), he may recover as a civil debt, in a court of competent jurisdiction, from the person referred to in subsection (1), the expenses necessarily
incurred by the Director in the exercise of his power.
380
Issue of environmental restoration order by a court
88. A court of competent jurisdiction may, in proceedings brought the
Director or by any other person, issue an environmental restoration order
against a person whose activities have caused harm or are causing harm or are
likely to cause harm to the environment.
PART XI - INSPECTION, ANALYSIS AND RECORDS
Designation of environmental inspectors
89. The Minister may, by notice published in the Gazette, designate duly
qualified public officers to be environmental inspectors within such areas and
in relation to such subject matter as may be specified in the Gazette designating them.
Powers and duties of environmental inspectors
90. (1) An environmental inspector may, in the performance of his
duties under this Act or the regulations made under this Act, without warrant -
(a) enter any land, premises, vessel or vehicle or any other
thing for purposes of determining whether the provisions of this Act are being complied with;
(b) require the production of, inspect, examine and make a
copy of licences, registers, records and any other document or thing relating to this Act or any other law
relating to the environment and the management of natural resources;
(c) take samples of any articles and substances to which
this Act relates and submit them for tests and analysis;
(d) carry out periodic inspections of all establishments and
undertakings which manufacture, produce as by-products, import, export, store, sell, distribute, or use any
substances that are likely to have significant impact on
the environment, to ensure that the provisions of this
Act are complied with;
381
(e) make examinations and inquiries so as to discover
whether the provisions of this Act are being complied
with;
(f) carry out such other inspections as may be necessary to
ensure that the provisions of this Act are complied with;
(g) issue a notice requiring the owner or operator of a manufacturing plant, undertaking or establishment which
pollutes or is likely to pollute the environment to take
appropriate remedial measures including the installation of new plant or machinery, where necessary;
(h) require the owner or operator of the manufacturing
plant or undertaking or establishment referred to in
paragraph (g) to implement remedial measures that the
environmental inspector may, in the notice closing
down that manufacturing plant undertaking or establishment, direct;
(i) issue a notice requiring the operator of a manufacturing
plant, undertaking or establishment to cease activities
deleterious to the environment;
(j) seize any plant, equipment, vessel, vehicle, manufacturing plant, substance or any other thing which he
believes has been used in the commission of an offence
against this Act or the regulations made under this Act;
(k) close, a manufacturing plant or other establishment,
undertaking or other activity which pollutes or is likely to pollute the environment contrary to the provisions
of this Act; or
(l) request a police officer to arrest a person whom he reasonably believes has committed an offence under this
Act.
(2) The Director may, for purposes of enabling environmental
inspectors to monitor compliance with the provisions of this Act or the regula382
tions made under this Act, install an equipment on any land, premises, manufacturing plant, vehicle or vessel or any other thing.
(3) The environmental inspector shall, in exercising his powers
under this Act or the regulations made under this Act, suitably identify himself
to a person who owns or operates a manufacturing plant, undertaking or establishment operating contrary to the provisions of this Act.
(4) The Minister may prescribe the form and manner in which
samples for analysis shall be taken.
(5) A person who tampers with the equipment installed by the
environmental inspector under this section commits an offence and is liable on
conviction to a fine not less than M20,000 or to imprisonment for a term not
less than 10 years or to both.
Designation of analytical laboratories, analysts and reference analysts
91. The Minister may, by notice published in the Gazette designate -
(a) a laboratory which may, amongst other things, be used for analytical and reference purposes; or
(b) persons who shall serve as analysts or reference analysts for the
purposes of this Act.
Certificate of analysis
92. (1) A laboratory designated as an analytical or reference laboratory under this Act shall issue a certificate of analysis on a substance submitted
to it pursuant to this Act.
(2) The certificate of analysis shall state the methods of analysis
followed and be signed by the analyst or reference analyst.
(3) A certificate issued pursuant to subsection (1) shall be sufficient evidence of the facts stated in the certificate for the purposes of this Act.
383
Record keeping
93. (1) The Minister may, by notice in the Gazette, prescribe the activities for which records shall be kept for the purposes of this Act, the contents
of those records and the manner in which they shall be kept.
(2) The records kept in accordance with subsection (1) or any other
records kept, for purposes of this Act, at the site of an establishment or undertaking shall be made available to the Director or an environment inspector for
the purposes of -
(a) an environmental audit;
(b) environmental monitoring;
(c) pollution control;
(d) inspection; and
(e) any other purpose that may be prescribed by the
Minister.
(3) The records kept pursuant to this section and any other records
kept for purposes of this Act or the regulation made under this Act shall be
copied and transmitted to the Director at such intervals as the Director may
determine.
(4) The Director shall keep all records transmitted to the Director
pursuant to subsection (3) and maintain their confidentiality where circumstances so require.
PART XII- INTERNATIONAL ENVIRONMENTAL CONVENTIONS
Conventions and treaties on the environment
94. (1) Where Lesotho is a party to an international or regional convention or agreement, concerning the management of the environment or natural resources, the Director shall, in consultation with the relevant Line
Ministry -
384
(a) initiate and prepare legislative proposals for consideration by the relevant Ministry for purposes of implementing those international or regional conventions or
agreements; and
(b) identify appropriate measures necessary for the implementation of conventions or agreements.
(2) The Director shall keep a register of all international conventions or agreements concerning the management of the environment or natural
resources to which Lesotho is a party.
PART XIII - INFORMATION, EDUCATION AND PUBLIC AWARENESS
Freedom of access to environmental information
95. (1) A person who desires to obtain information relating to the
implementation of this Act or any other information concerning the management of the environmental or natural resources shall subject to section 93(4)
have access to that information.
(2) A person referred to in subsection (1) shall -
(a) apply to the Director in writing indicating the type of
information he desires to obtain; and
(b) pay a fee, which may be prescribed by the Minister.
(3) The Director may grant access to the information referred to in
this section, on such terms and conditions, as the Director may deem necessary.
(4) Freedom of access to information pursuant to this section does
not extend to proprietary information, which shall be treated by the Director as
confidential.
(5) In this section, “proprietary information” means information
relating to any manufacturing process, trade secret, trade mark, copyright,
patent or formula protected by any other law.
385
Director to collect, analyze and disseminate environmental information
96. (1) The Director shall -
(a) gather information on the environment and natural
resources on the existing data;
(b) subject to any other law, have access to any data collection on the environment and natural resources;
(c) analyze information relating to the environment and
natural resources;
(d) disseminate information to public and private users;
(e) carry out public information and education campaigns
in the field of environment;
(f) exchange information relating to environment with
non-governmental organisations or any other regional
and international organisations;
(g) co-ordinate the management of environmental information with the relevant Line Ministries;
(h) advise the Council on existing information gaps and
needs; or
(i) establish in consultation with relevant Line Ministries,
guidelines and principles for the gathering, processing
and dissemination of environmental information.
(2) The Director shall every 5 years, publish a report on the state
of the environment and environment management in Lesotho.
(3) The Director may, publish any other information he considers
necessary for public education on the environment and other environmental
issues.
386
Environmental education
97. The Director shall, in consultation with the relevant Line Ministry, take
appropriate measures for the integration of education on the environment in all
levels of education.
PART XIV - ENVIRONMENTAL TRIBUNAL
Establishment of the Environmental Tribunal
98. (1) There is established a Tribunal to be known as the
“Environmental Tribunal”.
(2) The Tribunal shall consist of -
(a) a chairman who shall be a person who is a legal practitioner of not less than 5 years and shall be appointed by
the Minister after consultation with the Chief Justice;
(b) a person who holds a degree in law and has experience
in environmental issues and who shall be appointed by
the Minister;
(c) a person who has experience in environmental issues
and who shall be appointed by the Minister.
(3) A member and the chairman shall hold office for a term not
exceeding 5 years and are eligible for re-appointment.
(4) 2 members of the Tribunal shall form a quorum.
(5) At a meeting of the Tribunal, the chairman shall have a deliberative vote, and in the case of equality of votes he shall also have a casting
vote.
(6) The Tribunal may -
(a) regulate its own procedure;
(b) appoint one of its members to act as chairman where
387
the chairman is absent.
(7) There shall be a secretary of the Tribunal who shall be an officer of the Department.
(8) Where a person who is not a public officer is appointed a member of the Tribunal, he shall receive such allowance as the Minister after consultation with the Minister responsible for Finance, may determine.
(9) A member of the Tribunal who has a direct interest in a matter,
which is the subject of the proceedings before the Tribunal, shall not take part
in those proceedings.
Sittings of the Tribunal
99. The Tribunal shall sit in such place and at such times as the Chairman
may appoint.
Appeals to the Tribunal
100. (1) A person who is aggrieved by -
(a) a decision to issue or refuse to issue a licence or to the
transfer of his licence issued under this Act or the regulations made under this Act;
(b) the imposition of or failure to impose any condition,
limitation or restriction in a licence issued under this
Act or the regulations under this Act;
(c) the revocation, suspension or variation of a licence
issued under this Act or the regulations made pursuant
to this Act; or
(d) the imposition of an environmental restoration order
made under this Act or the regulations made pursuant
to this Act,
may, within 21 days of the date upon which he is informed of a decision or
order of any authority assigned to enforce this Act, appeal to the Tribunal
388
against that decision or order provided that no person may appeal to the
Tribunal from the issuance or refusal to issue a licence unless he has first
sought reconsideration of the Director’s decision as provided in this Act.
(2) A person making an appeal in accordance with subsection (1)
shall -
(a) give to the secretary of the Tribunal a written notice of
appeal; and
(b) set out in the notice of appeal the grounds upon which
the appeal is based.
(3) A person aggrieved by the decision of the Tribunal may appeal
to the High Court within 30 days from the date of the decision of the Tribunal.
Proceedings of the Tribunal
101. (1) The proceedings of the Tribunal shall be open to members of
the public except where the Tribunal for good cause, otherwise directs.
(2) The Tribunal shall not be bound by rules of evidence and shall
admit as evidence any matter, which in its opinion shall assist it to arrive at a
just and equitable decision for the advancement of the objects of this Act.
(3) The Tribunal shall have power to -
(a) summon any person to give evidence in any proceedings before the Tribunal or to produce to the Tribunal
any document relevant to the proceedings before it;
(b) confirm, vary, amend or alter a decision made by the
Director or an environmental inspector or reverse or
substitute such decision for any decision which is just
and equitable and which is in the interest of the protection and management of the environment or the conservation and sustainable utilization of natural resources.
389
PART XV - OFFENCES
Offences relating to environmental inspectors
102. A person who -
(a) hinders or obstructs an environmental inspector in the
execution of his duties under this Act;
(b) fails to comply with the lawful order or requirements
made by an environmental inspector in accordance
with this Act;
(c) refuses an environmental inspector entry upon any land
or into any premises which he is empowered to enter
by this Act;
(d) impersonates an environmental inspector;
(e) refuses an environmental inspector access to records
kept in accordance with this Act;
(f) fails to state or wrongly states his name or address to
an environmental inspector in the course of his duties
under this Act;
(g) misleads or gives wrong information to an environmental inspector under this Act;
(h) fails to carry out an improvement order issued by an
environmental inspector under this Act,
commits an offence and is liable on conviction, to a fine not less than M5,000
or to imprisonment for a term not less than 2 years or to both.
Offences relating to environmental impact assessment
103. Any person who -
(a) fails to submit a project brief contrary to section 20;
390
(b) fails to prepare an environmental impact statement
contrary to sections 21 and 25;
(c) fraudulently makes a false statement on an environmental impact statement submitted under section 21,
commits an offence and is liable on conviction, to a fine not less than M10,000
or to imprisonment for a term not less than 3 years or to both.
Offences relating to records
104. A person who -
(a) fails to keep records of the activities, products, byproducts, and wastes required to be kept by this Act;
(b) fraudulently alters any records required by this Act,
commits an offence and is liable on conviction to a fine not less than M5,000
or to imprisonment for a term not less than 2 years or to both.
Offences relating to environmental standards and guidelines
105. A person who -
(a) contravenes any environmental standards or guidelines
for which no other penalty is specifically provided for;
or
(b) contravenes a measure prescribed under this Act for
which no other penalty is specifically provided,
commits an offence and is liable on conviction to a fine not less than M5,000
or to imprisonment for a term not less than 2 years or to both.
General penalty
106. A person who commits an offence against any provision of this Act or
of regulations made thereunder for which no other penalty is specifically provided is liable to a fine not less than M5,000 or to imprisonment for a term not
391
less than 2 years or to both.
Liabilities of bodies corporate and partnerships
107. (1) Where an offence is committed under this Act or regulations
made under this Act by a body of persons -
(a) in the case of a body corporate other than a partnership,
every director or an officer of the body corporate shall
also be deemed to be guilty of the offence; and
(b) in the case of a partnership, every partner or officer of
that body shall also be deemed to be guilty of that
offence.
(2) No person shall be deemed to be guilty of an offence by virtue
of subsection (1) if he proves that the offence was committed without his
knowledge or connivance and that he exercised all due care and diligence to
prevent the commission of the offence having regard to all the circumstances.
Forfeiture, cancellation, community service and other orders
108. (1) The court, before which a person is prosecuted for an offence
against this Act or any regulations, standards or guidelines made under this
Act, may, in addition to any other order -
(a) upon the conviction of the accused; or
(b) if it is satisfied that an offence was committed notwithstanding that no person has been convicted of the
offence,
order that the substance, equipment and appliance used in the commission of
the offence be forfeited to the State and be disposed of as the court directs.
(2) In making an order under subsection (1), the court may also
order that the cost of disposing of the substance, equipment and appliance
referred to in subsection (1), be borne by the accused.
(3) The court may further order that any licence, permit or other
392
authorisation given under this Act and to which the offence relates be canceled.
(4) The court may, in addition to any fine may impose upon an
accused person, require him to do community work, which promotes the protection of the environment.
(5) The court may also issue an environmental restoration order
against the accused in accordance with Part IX of this Act.
PART XVI - MISCELLANEOUS
Jurisdiction of the courts
109. (1) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in any law contained,
a subordinate court of Second Class or higher class shall have jurisdiction to
impose any punishment provided for in this Act.
(2) Any court mentioned in subsection (1) shall have jurisdiction
to try any person under this Act whenever the thing in respect of which such
offence was committed was found within or was conveyed from, to or through
the jurisdiction of that court.
Immunity
110. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings may be brought against
a member of the Council, officers of the Department, an environmental inspector, an analyst or other officials in their personal capacity for anything done in
good faith under the provisions of this Act or the regulations, guidelines or
standards made under this Act.
Disclosure of interest
111. (1) A member of the technical advisory committee, who has any
direct or indirect interest in any matter being considered or dealt with by the
technical advisory committee, shall as soon as possible after the commencement of the meeting disclose to the Director the nature of that interest, and such
disclosure shall be recorded in the minutes of the technical advisory committee, and such member shall not take part in any deliberation or decision of the
technical advisory committee, with respect to the matter.
393
(2) A member who fails to disclose his interest under subsection
(1) shall be removed from the technical advisory committee.
Allowance of members of the Council and Technical Advisory Committee
112. A member of the technical advisory committee other than a public officer and an appointed member of the Council shall be paid such expenses and
allowances as may be determined by the Minister after consultation with the
Minister responsible for finance.
Regulations
113. (1) The Minister may make regulations for the purpose of giving
effect to the provisions of this Act.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of subsection (1), regulations made under subsection (1) may -
(a) provide for the issue, amendment and revocation of any
licence issued under this Act;
(b) prescribe fees and levies to be charged under this Act;
(c) provide for the protection of any particular species of
fauna and flora;
(d) provide for the control or restriction of access to genetic resources of Lesotho and provide for fees payable in
respect of accessing germplasm and an export licence;
(e) provide for the control of the manufacture, importation,
exportation, collection, transportation, treatment, storage, recycling, recovery or disposal of substances
which may be hazardous to the environment and public health;
(f) provide for the disposal of waste generally;
(g) provide for environmental impact assessment and
specify sizes of projects and activities specified in the
394
First Schedule;
(h) provide for environmental management plan and
strategic environmental assessment;
(i) provide for comprehensive mitigation plan;
(j) provide for conduct and certification of environmental
practitioners;
(k) provide for contingency plans in respect of projects;
(l) provide for the control of ozone depleting substances;
(m) provide for discharge of effluent into water and land;
(n) provide for the protection of degraded areas;
(o) provide for wetlands, river, and lakes management;
(p) provide for noise control; and
(q) prescribe anything required or permitted to be prescribed under this Act.
(3) Different regulations may be made under this Act.
(4) Regulations made under this section may adopt wholly or in
part or with modification any regulations, rules, standards, guidelines, instructions, specifications, by-laws, codes or administrative procedures prescribed
under any law either as in force at the time of the coming into operation of this
Act or as amended from time to time.
(5) The regulations made under this Act may provide for penalties
stipulated in this Act.
Inconsistency with other legislation
114. (1) In the event of any inconsistency between the provisions of this
Act and operation of any other law, the provisions of this Act shall prevail to
395
the extent of the inconsistency.
(2) A regulation made under this Act prevails over any statutory
regulations to the extent of any inconsistency.
Repeal and savings
115. (1) The Environment Act 2001
2 is repealed.
(2) Notwithstanding subsection (1) anything done under the provisions of the repealed law shall be deemed to have been done under the corresponding provisions of this Act.
Consequential amendment
116. The Local Government Act 1997 is amended in section 78 by inserting
the following subparagraph immediately after subparagraph (ii):
“(iiA) the District Environment Officer;”.
FIRST SCHEDULE (Section 19)
PART A
TYPES OF PROJECTS AND ACTIVITIES FOR WHICH AN ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT IS REQUIRED
1. General -
(a) any activity out of character with its surroundings;
(b) any structure of a scale not in keeping with its surroundings;
(c) major changes in land use.
2. Urban and Rural Development including -
(a) designation of new urban areas;
(b) establishment of industrial estates;
396
(c) establishment or expansion of recreational areas;
(d) establishment or expansion of recreational areas in
mountain areas, national parks and game reserves;
(e) rezoning;
(f) shopping centres and complexes;
(g) hotels and other tourist facilities;
(i) buildings with a total floor space of 500m
2
or more;
(j) declaration of development areas; and
(k) other infrastructure (both urban and rural).
3. Transportation including -
(a) major roads;
(b) all roads in scenic, wooded or mountainous areas;
(c) airports and airfields;
(d) pipelines;
(e) water transport activities;
(f) bridges;
(g) railways;
(h) cable ways and cable stations; and
(i) public transport mode transfer facilities.
4. Dams, rivers and water resources including -
(a) reservoirs, levees, storage dams, barrages and weirs;
397
(b) canals, channels, aqueducts, river diversions and
water transfers;
(c) flood control schemes;
(d) pipelines and water reticulation systems;
(e) projects or activities affecting other water sources such
as ground water, springs and wells.
5. Aerial spraying
6. Mining, mineral extraction including quarrying and open-cast
extraction of -
(a) precious stones, minerals and metals;
(b) coal;
(c) stone and slate;
(d) aggregates, sand and gravel;
(e) clay;
(f) tunneling;
(g) diamonds;
(h) limestone and dolomite;
(i) base metals.
7. Forestry related activities including -
(a) clearance of forest areas;
(b) deforestation and afforestation;
(c) timber harvesting;
398
(d) propagation of invasive alien species.
8. Agriculture including -
(a) large scale agriculture;
(b) use of agro-chemicals;
(c) introduction of new crops, animals and management
practices;
(d) manufacture, handling, storage and transport of hazardous waste, chemicals and pesticides and other agrochemicals;
(e) use of new pesticides;
(f) mass commercial production of livestock and battery
and feedlot farming installations;
(g) release of any organism outside its natural area of distribution that is to be used for biological pest control;
(h) genetic modification of organisms and release of such
organisms;
(i) large scale land reclamation.
9. Processing and manufacturing industries including -
(a) brick and earthware manufacture;
(b) explosives or ammunition plants;
(c) tanning and dressing of hides and skins;
(d) abattoirs and meat processing plants;
(e) brewing and malting;
399
(f) food processing plants;
(g) bulk grain-processing plants;
(h) mineral, processing reduction of areas or minerals;
(i) smelting and defining of ores or minerals;
(j) foundries;
(k) plants for the manufacture or assembling of motor
vehicles;
(l) plants for the manufacture of textiles;
(m) industries producing or utilizing hazardous substances
or materials;
(n) industries producing, handling, treating or disposing of
effluent;
(o) industries emitting major atmospheric pollutants;
(p) industries transporting or storing hazardous substances
or other chemical products;
(q) industrial installations for the bulk storage of fuel;
(r) bulk distribution facilities.
10. Energy and electric infrastructure including -
(a) electrical generation stations;
(b) electrical transmission lines;
(c) electrical substations;
(d) cable ways and cable way stations;
400
(e) nuclear installations.
11. Waste handling, storage, transport, treatment and disposal including -
(a) sites for solid waste disposal and wastewater treatment;
(b) sites for hazardous waste disposal;
(c) sewerage treatment and disposal works;
(d) activities or practices that may produce offensive
odours;
(e) industrial effluent;
(f) major atmospheric emissions;
(g) transportation and storage of hazardous substances or
waste;
(h) recycling plants.
12. National conservation areas including -
(a) creation of national parks and game reserves;
(b) commercial exploitation of natural fauna and flora;
(c) introduction of alien species of fauna and flora into
ecosystems;
(d) establishment of natural heritage sites;
(e) formulation or modification of forest management
policies;
(f) formulation or modification of water catchment management policies;
401
(g) policies for management of ecosystems, especially by
use of fire;
(h) any government policy on the use of natural resources.
13. Camp sites and hiking and ski trails developed for tourists.
14. Permanent racing and test tracks for cars and motorcycles.
15. Communication facilities, including telephone, television and radio
transmission masts.
16. Projects or activities that could affect the following areas or features -
(a) selected development areas;
(b) protected natural environments, wilderness areas,
nature reserves or national parks;
(c) mountain catchment areas;
(d) national monuments;
(e) national heritage sites;
(f) archaeological and paleontological sites;
(g) graves and burial sites;
(h) national gardens of remembrance;
(i) conservation areas;
(j) sites of conservation significance;
(k) meteorites;
(l) lake areas.
402
17. Projects or activities that could affect any of the following areas or
features which have been demarcated as such by central or local authority -
(a) streams and river channels, and their banks;
(b) floodplains and wetlands;
(c) indigenous forests;
(d) high potential agricultural land;
(e) caves;
(f) green belts or public open space in municipal areas;
(g) buildings;
(h) battle sites;
(i) burial sites;
(j) immovable property;
(k) landscapes;
(l) islands in rivers;
(m) biotic assemblages and communities;
(n) habitat of Red Data Book species;
(o) architectural precincts;
(p) aquifers and aquifer recharge areas;
(q) areas with a high natural water table;
(r) damaged land;
(s) unstable soil;
403
(t) natural resource areas (including minerals);
(u) sites of geological significance;
(v) geologically and geo technically unstable areas;
(w) areas or sites of outstanding natural beauty;
(x) scenic drives and panoramic views;
(y) areas or sites of special scientific interest;
(z) areas or sites of religious or spiritual significance;
(aa) areas or sites of special social, cultural or historical
interest;
(bb) bird migration sites.
FIRST SCHEDULE Section 19 (2)
PART B
Any Bill, regulation, public policy, programme or plan that could have significant impact on the environment.
SECOND SCHEDULE Section 83
Total Ban
Chemical Relevant CAS number (s) Category
2,4,5- T 93- 76- 5 Pesticide
Aldrin 309- 00- 2 Pesticide
Binapacryl 485- 31- 4 Pesticide
Captafol 2425- 06- 1 Pesticide
Chlordane 57- 74- 9 Pesticide
404
Chlordimeform 6164- 98- 3 Pesticide
Chlorobenzilate 510- 15- 6 Pesticide
DDT 50- 29- 3 Pesticide
Dieldrin 60- 57- 1 Pesticide
EDB (1,2 dibromoethane) 106- 93- 4 Pesticide
Endrin 2385-85-5 Pesticide
Ethylene dichloride 107- 06- 2 Pesticide
Ethylene oxide 75- 21- 8 Pesticide
Heptachlor 76- 44- 8 Pesticide
Hexachorobenzene 118- 74- 1 Pesticide
Mercury Compounds 99- 99- 9 Pesticide
Mirex 72-20-8 Pesticide
Monocrotophos 6923- 22- 4 Pesticide
Toxaphene (Camphechlor) 8001- 35- 2 Pesticide
Methamidophos (Soluble 10265- 92- 6 Pesticide Formulation
liquid formulations of the
substance that exceed 600g
active ingredient/1)
Methyl-parathion 298- 00- 0 Pesticide Formulation
(emulsifiable concentrates
(EC) with19.5%,40
%, 50%, 60% active
ingredient and dusts
containing 1.5%, 2% and
3% active ingredient)
405
Monocrotophos (Soluble 6923- 22- 4 Pesticide Formulation
liquid formulations of the
substance that exceed 600g
active ingredient/1)
Phosphamidon (Soluble 13171- 21- 6 Pesticide Formulation
liquid formulations for the
substance that exceed 1000g
active ingredient/1)
Dustable powder 17804- 35- 2 Pesticide Formulation
formulations containing a 1563- 66- 2
combination of Benomyl 137- 26- 8
at or above 7%, Carbofuran
at or above10% and Thiram
at or above 15%
Crocidolite 12001- 28- 4 Industrial
Asbestos 77536- 66- 4
Actinolite 77536- 67- 5 Industrial
Anthophyllite 12172- 73- 5
Amosite 77536- 68- 6
Tremolite
Polybrominated 13654- 09- 6
Biphenyls (PBBs) 36355- 01- 8 Industrial
27858- 07- 7
Polychlorinated 1336- 36- 3 Industrial
Biphenyls (PCBs) in
concentrations equal or
above 50ppm
NOTE
1. Act No. 6 of 1997
2. Act No. 15 of 2001
406
GOVERNMENT NOTICE NO. 237 OF 2008
THE PARLIAMENT OF LESOTHO
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS OF THE ENVIRONMENT
ACT, 2008
(Circulated by the Authority of the Minister responsible for Tourism,
Environment, and Culture, Hon. Lebohang Nt˘inyi)
Outline
1. The purpose of the Environment Bill 2008 is to make provision for the
protection and management of the environment and conservation and sustainable utilization of natural resources of Lesotho.
2. The Bill defines the broad activities and general principles of environmental management in Lesotho. It also invests each individual with a right to
a clean and healthy environment, imposes a corrective duty to protect, maintain and enhance the environment and defines a “citizen-right” to take legal
action against acts or omissions damaging to the environment.
3. The Bill creates an inter ministerial institution called the National
Environment Council which is chaired by the Minister responsible for environment. Its responsibility is to formulate environmental policy and to facilitate
the co-ordination and harmonisation of the policies, plans and activities of government organisations in the environment and natural resources field.
4. The Department of Environment is charged with responsibility to coordinate functions and activities of all line ministries on environmental issues
without interfering with their day to day activities. It has power to review and
approve environmental impact assessment.
5. The Bill introduces the concepts of environmental impact assessment
(E.I.A), audits and monitoring of projects; Environmental Impact Assessment
minimises environmental degradation. It helps to know about environmental
degradation before a project is implemented. Environmental Impact
Assessment refers to a study of the effects likely to arise from a proposed project on the environment. E.I.A. is carried out for the following reasons:
(a) to integrate environmental considerations in development plan407
ning;
(b) to identify and enhance the positive impacts of the proposed
projects;
(c) to ensure that potential negative impacts are foreseen and
addressed at an early stage in the project cycle; and
(d) to ensure that affected and interested communities participate
in the process.
6. The Bill also provides for audits of on-going activities and regular
monitoring of the effects of economic activities on the environment and natural resources.
7. The Bill also provides for environmental standards. Without environmental standards and guidelines it is impossible to measure pollution on air,
water, effluent etc.
8. The Bill establishes environment units in all Ministries and public corporations. Their function is to ensure that the Ministries comply with the provisions of environmental law.
9. The Bill introduces the principles and objectives of environmental
management and sustainable development. These basic principles ate the pollute pays principle, precautionary principle, ecosystem integrity and public
participation.
10. The Bill also provides for environmental planning. The Department of
Environment together with Line Ministries has to prepare the National Action
Plan. (NEAP). NEAP is the basis for national environmental planning and
implementation of development programmes. It will provide general guidance
for management and protection of the environment and it also has to identify
principal environmental problems facing the country. Planning at the local
level is calculated to ensure sensitivity to local concerns and needs, particularly with regard to the use of local resources.
11. The Bill also provides for centralised system for the establishment of
environmental quality criteria, standards and guidelines for air, water, effluent,
noise vibrations, radiation and solid waste. This is in contrast to the present
408
system where the sectoral agencies are supposed to set standards for their own
specific sectors with the attendant risk of non-regulation or under regulation of
certain issues. The Bill prohibits pollution in contravention of established environmental standards and guidelines and establishes a licensing system for polluting activities. The polluter is required to clean up the polluted environment,
pay the full cost of cleaning up, and compensate third parties for damage arising from pollution.
12. The Bill also deals with the declaration of environmental protection
areas for the management of sensitive ecosystems and species outside the
existing protected area systems; and the issuance of environmental protection
orders to enforce rational environmental management. It also addressed specific issues, which are the subject of international environmental agreements to
which Lesotho is a party. These are the conservation of biological diversity;
access to genetic resources; waste management (including the regulation of the
generation, import and export of hazardous wastes); the management of pesticides and other hazardous substances; and the protection of the stratospheric
ozone layer. All these issues cut across environmental resource sectors and
should therefore be dealt with in a framework environmental law.
13. The Bill gives the Director of Environment powers to serve an environmental restoration notice to a person whose activities are or are likely to cause
harm to the environment. This notice calls for that person to remedy or prevent
harm to the environment.
14. The Bill provides for the establishment of an Environmental Tribunal
to handle certain administrative decisions of the Director and environmental
inspectors. These appeals concern environmental restoration orders and granting of licenses. The main objective is to avoid the delays, technicalities and
expenses inherent in the normal judicial proceedings. The disputes which are
likely to arise regarding the decisions of these authorities will need expeditious
handling so as to facilitate timely economic decision-making. Other issues are,
however, to be handled through the normal judicial process.
15. The Bill also provides for the declaration of an environmental emergency where there is a threat to the environment and human health.
16. The Bill also gives Magistrates courts power to hear environmental
cases.
409
Printed by the Government Printer, P.O. Box 268, Maseru 100, Lesotho
Supplement No. 1
to Gazette No. 80 of 5th December, 2008
CONTENTS
No. Page
ACT
10 Environment Act 2008 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 299
GOVERNMENT NOTICE
237 Statement of Objects and Reasons of the Environment . . . . . . . . . . 407
Act, 2008
Published by the Authority of His Majesty the King
Price: M58.00
412