FEDERAL ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY ACT
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS
PART I
Establishment, membership, functions and powers of the Federal Environmental Protection Agency  
SECTION
1. Establishment of the Federal Environmental Protection Agency.  
2. Governing Council of the Agency.  
3. Establishment and functions of the Technical Committee.  
4. Removal from office of member of the Agency.  
5. Functions of the Agency.  
6. Powers of the Agency to give grants, etc.  
7. Power of the President to give directions.  
8. Director‐General and other staff of the Agency.  
9. Pensions.  
10. Powers of the Director‐General.  
11. Power to accept gifts, etc.  
12. Residences, offices and premises.  
13. Fund of the Agency.  
14. Borrowing power.  
15. Annual estimates, accounts and audit.  
PART II
National environmental standards
Water quality
16. Federal water quality standards.  
17. Effluent limitations.  
Air quality and atmospheric protection
18. Air quality, etc.  
19. Ozone protection.  
Noise
20.   Noise control.  
Hazardous substances
21. Discharge of hazardous substances.  
22. Spiller's liability.  
23. Removal methods, etc.  
24. Co‐operation with the Ministry of Petroleum Resources.  
PART III
Establishment of State and local government Environmental Protection Bodies
25. Establishment of State and local government bodies.  
PART IV
Supplementary and miscellaneous
Enforcement powers
26. Powers to inspect, etc.  
              
27.   Powers to search, seize and arrest.  
28. Obstruction of authorised officers.
29. Authorised officers to disclose identity.  
30.   Procedure in respect of suits against the Agency.  
31.   Service of documents.  
32.   Restriction on execution against the property of the Agency.
33.    Indemnity of members and employees of the Agency.
34.   Annual report.  
General penalties and legal proceedings
35.   Material misrepresentation and impersonation.  
36. General penalties.  
37.   Companies and firms liable.
Miscellaneous
  
38.   Delegation of functions, etc.  
39.   Repeal, etc.  
40.   Power to make regulations.
41.   Interpretation.  
42. Short title.  
SCHEDULE
Supplementary provisions relating to the Agency
_________________________________
FEDERAL ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY ACT
An Act to establish the Federal Environmental Protection Agency with its functions and the powers for the
effective implementation of such functions.  
[1988 No. 58. 1992 No. 59. 1999 No. 14.]
[30th December, 1988]  
[Commencement. ]
PART I
Establishment, membership, functions and powers of the Federal  
Environmental Protection Agency
1. Establishment of the Federal Environmental Protection Agency  
(1) There is hereby established a body to be known as the Federal Environmental Protection Agency (in this Act
referred to as "the Agency") which under that name shall be a body corporate with perpetual succession and a
common seal, and may sue and be sued in its corporate name.  
(2) The Agency shall be an integral part of the Presidency.  
[1992 No. 59.]
2. Governing Council of the Agency  
(1) There shall be, as the governing body of the Agency, a Council which shall consist of a chairman to be appointed
by the President and the following other members, that is‐  
(a)   the Permanent Secretaries charged with responsibility for‐  
(i)   Agriculture and Natural Resources;  
(ii)   Commerce and Tourism;
(iii)   Communications;  
(iv)   Culture and Tourism;  
(v)   Education;  
(vi)   Finance;  
(vii)   Health;  
(viii)   Industry;  
(ix)   Petroleum Resources;  
(x)   Science and Technology;  
(xi)   Solid Minerals;  
(xii)   Transport;  
(xiii)   Works and Housing;  
(xiv)   Youth and Sports;  
(b)   two other persons from the private sector who shall have distinguished themselves m environmental
matters.  
(2) …..
[1999 No. 14.]
(3) The supplementary provisions contained in the Schedule to this Act shall have effect with respect to the
proceedings of the Agency and the other matters therein mentioned.  
[Schedule.]
3. Establishment and functions of the Technical Committee  
(1) There is hereby established for the Agency, a technical committee to be known as the Federal Environmental
Protection Agency Technical Committee (in this Act referred to as "the Technical Committee").  
(2) The Technical Committee shall consist of the following members, that is‐ 
(a)   a chairman who shall be the Director‐General and chief executive of the Agency;  
(b)   three distinguished persons having wide knowledge and possessing such skills and expertise in
environmental matters;  
(c)   one representative each of the following Ministries not below the rank of a Director, that 1S‐  
(i)   Agriculture, Water Resources and Rural Development;  
(ii)   Finance;  
(i) Health and Human Services;  
(iv)   Industries and Technology;  
(v)   Petroleum and Mineral Resources;  
(vi)   Works and Housing;  
(vii)   Transport and Communications;  
(viii)   Education and Youth Development; and  
(d)   a representative each of‐  
(i)   the Manufacturers' Association of Nigeria; and
   (ii)   the Nigerian Conservation Foundation.  
(3) The functions of the Technical Committee shall be‐  
(a)   to assist and advise the Council and the Agency in the performance of their functions under this Act;  
and  
(b)   to give technical opinion on issues referred to it or delegated by the Council.  
[1992 No. 59.]
4. Removal from office of member of the Agency  
The office of a member who is not a public officer shall become vacant if he resigns his office by a letter addressed
by him to the President, or if the President is satisfied that it is not in the interest of the Agency for the person
appointed to continue in office as a member, in which case the President shall notify the member in writing to that
effect.  
5. Functions of the Agency  
The Agency shall, subject to this Act, have responsibility for the protection and development of the environment
and biodiversity conservation and sustainable development of Nigeria's natural resources in general and
environmental technology, including initiation of policy in relation to environmental research and technology; and
without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing, it shall be the duty of the Agency to‐  
[1992 No. 59.]
(a)   prepare a comprehensive national policy for the protection of the environment and    
conservation of natural resources, including procedure for environmental impact assessment  
for all development projects;  
(b)   prepare, in accordance with the National Policy on the Environment, periodic master plans  
for the development of environmental science and technology and advise the Federal    
Government on the financial requirements for the implementation of such plans;  
(c)   advise‐  
    (i)   the Federal Government on national environmental policies and priorities, the   
    conservation of natural resources and sustainable development, and scientific and    
technological activities affecting the environment and natural resources;  
    (ii)   the President on the utilisation of the one per cent Ecological Fund for the    
    protection of the environment;  
(d)   promote co‐operation in environmental science and conservation technology with similar  
bodies in other countries and with international bodies connected with the protection of the  
environment and the conservation of natural resources;  
(e)   co‐operate with Federal and State Ministries, local governments, statutory bodies and    
research agencies on matters and facilities relating to the protection of the environment and  
the conservation of natural resources; and  
(f) carry out such other activities as are necessary or expedient for the full discharge of the   
functions of the Agency under this Act.  
[1992 No. 59.]
6. Power of the Agency to give grants, etc.  
In carrying out the functions prescribed in section 5 of this Act and in other provisions of this Act, it shall be lawful
for the Agency to‐  
(a)   make grants to suitable authorities and bodies with similar functions for demonstration and  
for such other purposes as may be determined appropriate to further the purposes and   
provision of this Act;  
(b)   collect and make available, through publications and other appropriate means and in co‐
operation with public or private organisations, basic scientific data and other information pertaining to pollution
and environmental protection matters and the degradation of natural resources;  
[1992 No. 59.]
(c)   enter into contracts with public or private organisations and individuals for the purpose of  
executing and fulfilling its functions and responsibilities pursuant to this Act;  
(d)   establish, encourage and promote training programmes for its staff and other appropriate  
individuals from public or private organisations;  
(e)   enter into agreements with public or private organisations and individuals to develop, utilise,  
co‐ordinate and share environmental monitoring programmes, research effects, basic data  
or chemical, physical and biological effects of various activities on the environment and other  
environmentally related activities as appropriate;  
(f)    establish advisory committees composed of administrative, technical or other experts in such  
environmental areas as the Agency may consider useful and appropriate to assist it in    
carrying out the purposes and provisions of this Act;  
[1992 No. 59.]
(g)   establish such environmental criteria, guidelines, specifications or standards for the    
protection of the nation's air and inter‐State waters as may be necessary to protect the    
health and welfare or the population from environmental degradation;  
(h)   establish such procedures for industrial or agricultural activities in order to minimise damage  
to the environment and natural resources from such activities;  
[1992 No. 59.]
(i)   maintain a programme of technical assistance to bodies (public or private) concerning
implementation of natural resources conservation, environmental criteria, guidelines, regulations and standards
and monitoring enforcement of the regulations and standards thereof; and  
[1992 No. 59.]  
(j) develop and promote such processes, methods, devices and materials as may be useful or incidental in
carrying out the purposes and provisions of this Act.  
7. Power of the President to give directions  
Subject to this Act, the President may give to the Agency directions of a general nature or relating generally to
particular matters, but not to any particular individual or case with regard to the performance by the Agency of its
functions under this Act and it shall be the duty of the Agency to comply with the directions.  
8. Director‐General and other staff of the Agency  
(1) There shall be appointed by the President a Director‐General of the Agency.  
(2) The Director‐General shall be the chief executive of the Agency and shall hold office in the first
instance for five years, and thereafter, shall be eligible for re‐appointment for one further term of five years only,
on terms and conditions as may be specified in his letter of appointment.  
(3) The Agency may appoint such other persons to be employees of the Agency as it may deem fit, on
such terms and conditions as may be determined by the Agency.  
(4) The Agency shall, with the approval of the President, make staff regulations governing conditions of
service of its employees.  
(5) The Agency may grant loans to its employees for purposes approved by the President.  
9. Pensions  
(1) It is hereby declared that service in the Agency shall be public service for the purposes of the Pensions Act and
accordingly officers and other such staff of the Agency shall in respect of their services be entitled to such
pensions, gratuities and other retirement benefits as are prescribed thereunder.  
[Cap. P4.]
(2) For the purposes of the application of the provisions of the Pensions Act, any powers exercisable
thereunder by a Minister or other authority of the Government of the Federation (not being the power to make
regulations under section 23 thereof) are hereby vested in and shall be exercisable by the Agency and not by any
other person or authority.  
10. Power of the Director‐General  
The Director‐General shall, subject to the policies laid down by the Agency, develop programmes to carry out the
purposes and provisions of this Act and, without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing, shall, in particular
and in consultation with appropriate agencies‐  
[1992 No. 59.]
(a)   establish programmes for the prevention, reduction and elimination of pollution of the    
nation's air, land and inter‐State waters, as well as national programmes for restoration and  
enhancement of the nation's environment and natural resources;  
[1992 No. 59.]
(b)   encourage and promote the co‐ordination of the conservation of natural resources and    
environmentally related activities at all levels;  
[1992 No. 59.]
(c)   utilise and promote the expansion of research, experiments, surveys and studies by public or  
private agencies, institutions and organisations concerning causes, effects, extent,    
prevention, reduction and elimination of pollution and such other matters related to    
environmental protection and natural resources conservation as the Agency may, from time  
to time, determine necessary and useful; and  
[1992 No. 59.]
(d)   conduct public investigations on pollution and the degradation of natural resources.  
[1992 No. 59.]
11. Power to accept gifts, etc.  
(1) Subject to subsection (2) of this section, the Agency may accept gifts of land, money, books or other property
upon such terms and conditions, if any, as may be specified by the person making the gift.  
(2) The Agency shall not accept any gift if the conditions attached thereto by the person making the gift are
inconsistent with the functions of the Agency under this Act.  
12. Residence, offices and premises  
(1) For the purposes of providing residential accommodation for its staff, offices and premises as  
may be considered necessary for the performance of its functions under this Act, the Agency may‐  
(a)   purchase or take on lease any interest in land; and  
(b)   build, furnish, equip and maintain residential quarters, offices and premises.  
(2) Subject to the Land Use Act, the Agency may, with the approval of the President, sell or lease any residential
quarters, land, offices or premises held by it and no longer required for the performance of its functions.  
[Cap. L5.]
13. Fund of the Agency  
(1) The Agency shall establish and maintain a fund from which there shall be defrayed all expenses incurred by the
Agency in the performance of the Agency's duties and functions under this Act.  
(2) The fund established under subsection (1) of this section shall consist of the following, that is‐  
(a)   25 per cent of the one per cent Ecological Fund of the Federation Account;  
(b)   such sums as may, from time to time, be granted to the Agency by the Government of the  
Federation;  
(c)   all money raised for the purposes of the Agency by way of gifts, grants‐in‐aid, testamentary  
dispositions and sale of publications;  
(d)   subscriptions, fees and charges for services rendered by the Agency and all other sums that  
may accrue to the Agency from any other source.  
[1992 No. 59.]
14. Borrowing power  
(1) The Agency may, with the consent of the President or in accordance with the general authority given
by the Federal Government, borrow by way of loan or overdraft from any source any moneys required by the
Agency to meet its obligations and its functions under this Act, so however that no such consent or authority shall
be required where the sum or aggregate of the sums involved at any time does not exceed such amount as is for
the time being specified in relation to the Agency by the Federal Government.  
(2) The Agency may, subject to the provisions of this Act and the conditions of any trust in respect of any
property, invest all or any of its funds with the like consent or general authority.  
(3) The Agency may invest any of its surplus funds in such securities as may be permitted by law.  
15. Annual estimates, accounts, and audit  
(1) The Agency shall cause to be prepared not later than six months before the end of each year an estimate of the
expenditure and income of the Agency during the next succeeding financial year and, when prepared, they shall be
submitted to the Minister.  
(2) The Agency shall cause to be kept proper accounts and proper records in relation thereto and, when certified
by the Agency, such accounts shall be audited as provided in subsection (3) of this section.  
(3) The accounts of the Agency shall be audited as soon as may be practicable after the end of each year by
auditors appointed from the list and in accordance with the guidelines supplied by the Auditor‐General for the
Federation.  
PART II
National environmental standards
Water quality
16. Federal water quality standards  
(1) The Agency shall make recommendations to the President for the purpose of establishing
water quality standards for the inter‐State waters of Nigeria to protect the public health or welfare and enhance
the quality of water to serve the purposes of this Act.
(2) In establishing such standards, the Agency shall take into consideration the use and value for public
water supplies, propagation of fish and wildlife, recreational purposes, agricultural, industrial and other legitimate
uses.  
(3) The Agency shall establish different water quality standards for different uses.  
17. Effluent limitations  
(1) The Agency shall, as soon as possible after the commencement of this Act, establish effluent
limitations for new point sources which shall require application of the best control technology currently available
and implementation of the best management practices.  
(2) The Agency shall, as soon as possible after the commencement of this Act, establish effluent
limitations for existing point sources which shall require the application of the best management practices under
circumstances as determined by the Agency, and shall include schedules of compliance for installation and
operation of the best practicable control technology as determined by the Agency.  
Air quality and atmospheric protection
18. Air quality, etc.  
(1) The Agency shall establish more criteria, guidelines, specifications and standards to protect and
enhance the quality of Nigeria's air resources so as to promote the public health or welfare and the normal
development and productive capacity of the nation's human, animal or plant life, and include in particular‐  
(a)   minimum essential air quality standards for human, animal or plant health;  
(b)   the control of concentration of substances in the air which separately or in combination are  
likely to result in damage or deterioration of property or of human, animal or plant health;  
(c)   the most appropriate means to prevent and combat various forms of atmospheric pollution;  
(d)   controls for atmospheric pollution originating from energy sources, including that produced by
aircraft and other self‐propelled vehicles and in factories and power generation stations;  
(e)   standards applicable to emission from any new mobile source which in the Agency's    
judgement causes or contributes to air pollution which may reasonably be anticipated to  
endanger public health or welfare; and  
(f) the use of appropriate means to reduce emission to permissible levels.  
(2) The Agency may establish monitoring stations or networks to locate sources of atmospheric pollution and
determine their actual or potential danger.  
19. Ozone protection  
(1) The Agency shall undertake to study data and recognise developments in international force and other
countries regarding the cumulative effect of all substances, practices, processes and activities which may affect the
stratosphere, especially ozone in the stratosphere.  
(2) The Agency may make recommendations and programmes for the control of any substance, practice, process
or activity which may reasonably be anticipated to affect the stratosphere, especially ozone in the stratosphere,
when such effect may reasonably be anticipated to endanger public health or welfare.  
(3) For the purposes of this section, "stratosphere" means that part of the atmosphere above the troposphere.  
Noise
20. Noise control  
(1) The Agency shall, as soon as practicable after the commencement of this Act, in consultation with appropriate
authorities‐  
(a)   identify major noise sources, noise criteria and noise control technology; and  
(b)   establish such noise abatement programmes and noise emission standards as it may    
determine necessary to preserve and maintain public health or welfare.  
(2) Any noise criteria identified under this section shall reflect the scientific knowledge most useful in indicating the
kind and extent of all identifiable effects on the public health or welfare which may be expected from differing
qualities and quantities of noise.  
(3) The Agency shall make recommendations to control noise originating form industrial, commercial, domestic,
sports, recreational, transportation or other similar activities.  
Hazardous substances
21. Discharge of hazardous substances  
(1) The discharge in such harmful quantities of any hazardous substance into the air or upon the land and the
waters of Nigeria or at the adjoining shorelines is prohibited, except where such discharge is permitted or
authorised under any law in force in Nigeria.  
(2) Any person who violates the provisions of subsection (1) of this section commits an offence and shall
on conviction be liable to a fine not exceeding N100, 000 or to imprisonment for a term not exceeding ten years or
to both such fine and imprisonment.  
(3) Where an offence under subsection (1) of this section is committed by a body corporate it shall on conviction
be liable to a fine not exceeding N500, 000 and an additional fine of N 1, 000 for every day the offence subsists.  
(4) Where any offence under this Act has been committed by a body corporate, the body corporate and
every person who at the time the offence was committed was in charge of, or was responsible to the body
corporate for the conduct of the business of the body corporate, shall be deemed to be guilty of such offence and
shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly:  
Provided that nothing contained in this subsection shall render any person liable to any punishment, if he
proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he exercised all due diligence to prevent the
commission of such offence.  
(5) The Agency shall, as soon as possible after the commencement of this Act, determine for the purposes
of this section what substances are hazardous substances and such hazardous substances, the discharge of which
shall be harmful under the circumstances to public health or welfare and, for this purpose, the Agency shall take
into account such special circumstances including locations, quantity and climatic conditions relating to discharge
as it may determine appropriate.  
(6) Notwithstanding the provisions of this section or of any other sections of this Act the provisions of the
Harmful Waste (Special Criminal Provisions, etc.) Act shall apply in respect of any hazardous substance constituting
harmful waste as defined in section 15 thereof.  
[Cap. Hl.]
22. Spiller's liability  
(1) Except where an owner or operator can prove that a discharge was caused solely by a natural disaster or an act
of war or by sabotage, such owner or operator of any vessel or onshore or offshore facility from which the
hazardous substance is discharged in violation of section 21 of this Act, shall in addition to the penalty specified in
that section be liable for‐  
(a)   the cost of removal thereof, including any costs which may be incurred by any Government  
body or agency in the restoration or replacement of natural resources damaged or destroyed  
as a result of the discharge; and  
(b)   costs of third parties in the form of reparation, restoration, restitution or compensation as  
may be determined by the Agency from time to time.  
(2) The owner or operator or a vessel or onshore or offshore facility from which there is a discharge in violation of
section 21 of this Act shall, to the fullest extent possible, act to mitigate the damage by‐  
(a)   giving immediate notice of the discharge to the Agency and any other relevant agencies;  
(b)   beginning immediate clean‐up operations following the best available clean‐up practice and  
removal methods as may be prescribed by regulations made under section 23 of this Act; and  
(c)   promptly complying with such other directions as the Agency may, from time to time, prescribe.  
23. Removal methods, etc.  
The President for purposes of this Part of this Act may, by regulations, prescribe any specific removal methods,
national contingency plans, financial responsibility levels for owners or operators of vessels, or onshore or offshore
facilities, notice and reporting requirements, penalties and compensation as he may determine necessary to
minimise pollution by any hazardous substance.  
24. Co‐operation with the Ministry of Petroleum Resources  
The Agency shall co‐operate with the Ministry of Petroleum Resources (Department of Petroleum Resources) for
the removal of oil‐related pollutants discharged into the Nigerian environment and play such supportive role as the
Ministry of Petroleum Resources (Department of Petroleum Resources) may, from time to time, request from the
Agency.  
PART III
Establishment of State and local government environmental protection bodies
25. Establishment of State and local government bodies  
The President shall, as soon as possible after the commencement of this Act, encourage States and local
government councils to set up their own environmental protection bodies for the purpose of maintaining good
environmental quality in the areas of related pollutants under their control, subject to the provisions of this Act.  
PART IV
Supplementary and miscellaneous
Enforcement powers
26. Powers to inspect, etc.  
For the purposes of enforcing this Act, any authorised officer may, without a warrant‐  
(a)   require to be produced, examine and take copies of, any licence, permit, certificate or other  
document required under this Act or any regulations made thereunder;  
(b)   require to be produced and examine any appliance, device or other item used in relation to  
environmental protection.  
27. Powers to search, seize and arrest  
(1) Any authorised officer, where he has reasonable grounds for believing that an offence has been committed
against this Act or any regulations made thereunder, may without a warrant‐  
(a)   enter and search any land, building, vehicle, tent, vessel, floating craft or any inland water or  
other structure whatsoever, in which he has reason to believe that an offence against this  
Act or any regulations made thereunder has been committed;  
(b)   perform tests and take samples of any substances relating to the offence which are found on  
the land, building, vehicle, tent, vessel, floating craft or any inland water or other structure  
whatsoever, searched pursuant to paragraph (a) of this subsection;  
(c)   cause to be arrested any person who he has reason to believe has committed such offence;  
and  
(d)   seize any item or substance which he has reason to believe has been used in the commission  
of such offence or in respect of which the offence has been committed.  
(2) A written receipt shall be given for any article or thing seized under subsection (1) of this section and the
grounds for such seizure shall be stated on such receipt.  
28. Obstruction of authorised officers  
Any person who‐  
(a)   wilfully obstructs any authorised officer in the exercise of any of the powers conferred on  
him by this Act; or  
(b)   fails to comply with any lawful enquiry or requirements made by any authorised officer in  
accordance with the provisions of section 26 of this Act,  
commits an offence and shall on conviction be liable to a fine not exceeding N500,000 or to imprisonment for a
term not exceeding ten years or to both such fine and imprisonment.  
29. Authorised officers to disclose identity  
(1) Any authorised officer, not in uniform when acting under the provisions of this Act, shall, on demand, declare
his office and produce to any person against whom he is taking action such identification or written authority as
may reasonably be sufficient to show that he is an authorised officer for the purposes of this Act.  
(2) It shall not be an offence for any person to refuse to comply with any request, demand or order made by any
authorised officer not in uniform, if such authorised officer refuses, on demand being made by such person, to
declare his office or produce such identification or written authority.  
30. Procedure in respect of suits against the Agency  
(1) No suit against the Agency, a member of the Agency or any employee of the Agency for any act done
in pursuance or execution of any law, or of any public duties, or in respect of any alleged neglect or default in the
execution of such law, duties or authority, shall lie or be instituted in any court unless it is commenced within
twelve months next after the act, neglect or default complained of or, in the case of a continuance of damage or
injury, within twelve months next after the ceasing thereof.  
(2) No suit shall be commenced against the Agency before the expiration of a period of one month after
written notice of intention to commence the suit shall have been served upon the Agency by the intending plaintiff
or his agent; and the notice shall clearly and explicitly state‐  
(a)   the cause of action;  
(b)   the particulars of the claim;  
(c)   the name and place of abode of the intending plaintiff; and  
(d)   the relief which he claims.  
31. Service of documents  
The notice referred to in section 30 (2) of this Act and any summons, notice or other document required or
authorised to be served upon the Agency under the provisions of this Act or any other law, may be served by
delivering the same to the chairman or the Director‐General, or by sending it by registered post addressed to the
Director‐General, at the Secretariat of the Agency.  
32. Restriction on execution against the property of the Agency  
In any action or suit against the Agency, no execution or attachment or process in the nature thereof shall be
issued against the Agency, but any sums of money which by judgment of the court are awarded against the Agency
shall, subject to any directions given by the Agency, be paid from the general reserve fund of the Agency.  
33. Indemnity of members of the Agency and employees of the Agency
Every member of the Agency, or agent, auditor or employee for the time being of the Agency, shall be indemnified
out of the assets of the Agency against any liability incurred by him in defending any proceeding, whether civil or
criminal, if any such proceeding is brought against him in capacity as such member, agent, auditor or employee as
aforesaid.  
34. Annual report  
The Agency shall, not later than 30 September in each year, submit to the Minister a report on the activities of the
Agency and its administration during the immediately preceding year and shall include in such report the audited
accounts of the Agency.  
General penalties and legal proceedings
35. Material misrepresentation and impersonation  
(1) If a person knowingly or recklessly makes any statement in purported compliance with a requirement to furnish
information, which is false in a material particular, he commits an offence and shall on conviction be liable to a fine
not exceeding N200 or imprisonment for a term not exceeding one year or to both such fine and imprisonment.  
(2) Any person who falsely represents himself to be an authorised officer of the Agency and assumes to do any act
or to attend in any place for the purpose of doing any act on behalf of the Agency, shall be guilty of an offences
under this Act and on conviction shall be liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding two years.  
36. General penalties  
Any person who contravenes any provisions of this Act or any regulation made thereunder commits an offence and
shall on conviction, where no specific penalty is prescribed therefor, be liable to a fine not exceeding N20,000 or to
imprisonment for a term not exceeding two years or to both such fine and imprisonment.  
37. Companies and firms liable  
Where any offence against this Act or any regulations made thereunder has been committed by a body corporate
or by a member or a partnership or other firm or business, every director or officer of that body corporate or any
member of the partnership or other person concerned with the management of such firm or business shall, on
conviction, be liable to a fine not exceeding N500,000 for such offence and, in addition, the body corporate, firm or
partnership shall be directed to pay compensation for any damage resulting from such breach thereof or to repair
and restore the polluted environmental area to an acceptable level as approved by the Agency.  
[1992 No. 59.]
Miscellaneous
38. Delegation of functions, etc.  
(1) The Council may delegate any of its functions and duties under this Act to the Technical Committee or the
Director‐General, as the case may be.  
[1992 No. 59.]
(2) Nothing contained in subsection (1) of this section shall preclude the exercise by the Council of any of the
functions or duties delegated by it to the Technical Committee or the Director‐General.  
[1992 No. 59.]
39. Repeal, etc.  
(1) The Natural Resources Conservation Act is hereby repealed.  
[1992 No. 59.]
(2) The repeal of the enactment referred to in subsection (1) of this section shall not affect anything done or
purported to have been done under the repealed enactment.  
[1992 No. 59.]
40. Power to make regulations  
The Director‐General may, with the approval of the Council, make regulations generally for the purposes of this Act
and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing, the Director‐General may, in particular, prescribe
standards for‐  
(a)   water quality;  
(b)   effluent limitations;  
(c)   air quality;  
(d)   atmospheric protection;  
(e)   ozone protection;  
(f)   noise control; and  
(g)   control of hazardous substances and removal control methods.  
[1992 No. 59.]
41. Interpretation  
In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires‐  
"appropriate agencies" means any government agencies which have jurisdiction over the land or water affected
by the pollution or any government agencies which ordinarily have jurisdiction over the operation which led to the
pollution;  
"authorised officer" means any employee of the Agency, any police officer not below the rank of an Inspector of
Police, or any customs officer;  
"court" means the Federal High Court;  
"Director" means the Director of the Federal Environmental Protection Agency;  
"disposal" includes both land‐based disposal and dumping in waters and airspace of Nigeria;  
"effluent limitation" means any restriction established by the Agency of quantities, rates and concentration of
chemical, physical, biological or other constituents which are discharged from point sources into the waters of
Nigeria;  
"environment" includes water, air, land and all plants and human beings or animals living therein and the inter‐
relationships which exist among these or any of them;
"hazardous substance" includes any substance designated as such by the President by order published in the
Federal Gazette;  
"new source" means any source, the construction of which is commenced after the publication of any regulations
prescribing a standard of performance under this Act, which are applicable to such source;  
"offshore facility" means any facility of any kind located over, in, or under any of the waters of Nigeria;  
"onshore facility" means any facility (including, but not limited to motor vehicles and rolling stock) of any kind
located over, in, or under any land within Nigeria other than submerged land;  
"owner" or "operator" means‐  
(a)   in the case of a vessel, any person owning, operating or chartering by demise such vessel;  
(b)   in the case of an onshore facility or an offshore facility, any person owning or operating such  
onshore facility or offshore facility; and  
(c)   in the case of any abandoned offshore facility, the person who owned or operated such   
facility immediately prior to such abandonment; from which pollutants are or may be    
discharged;  
"point source" means any discernible, confined and discrete conveyance, including but not limited to any pipe;
ditch, channel, tunnel, conduit, well, discrete fissure, container, rolling stock, concentrated animal feeding
operation or vessel or other floating craft from which pollutants are or may be discharged;  
"pollution" means man‐made or man‐aided alteration of chemical, physical or biological quality of the
environment to the extent that is detrimental to that environment or beyond acceptable limits and "pollutant"
shall be construed accordingly;  
"removal" means removal of hazardous substances from waters of Nigeria, including shorelines or the taking of
such other action as may be necessary to minimise or mitigate damage to the public health or welfare, ecology and
natural resources of Nigeria;  
"waters of Nigeria" means all water resources in any form, including atmospheric, surface and subsurface, and
underground water resources where the water resources are inter‐State, or in the Federal Capital Territory,
territorial waters, Exclusive Economic Zone or in any other area under the jurisdiction of the Federal Government.  
42. Short title  
This Act may be cited as the Federal Environmental Protection Agency Act.  
___________________________
SCHEDULE
[Section 2 (3).]
SUPPLEMENTARY PROVISIONS RELATING TO THE AGENCY
Proceedings
1. Subject to this Act and section 27 of the Interpretation Act (which provides for decisions of a statutory body to
be taken by a majority of its members and for the person presiding to have a second or casting vote), the Council
may make standing orders regulating the proceedings of the Councilor any committee thereof.  
[Cap. 123.]
2. Every meeting of the Council shall be presided over by the chairman or in his absence the members present at
the meeting shall elect one of their number to preside at the meeting.  
3. The quorum at a meeting of the Council shall consist of the chairman (or in an appropriate case the person
presiding at the meeting pursuant to paragraph 2 of this Schedule) and six other members.  
4. Where upon any special occasion the Council desires to obtain the advice of any person on any particular
matter, the Council may co‐opt that person to be a member for as many meetings as may be necessary; and that
person while so co‐opted shall have all the rights and privileges of a member except that he shall not be entitled to
vote.  
Committees
5. (1) Subject to its standing orders, the Council may appoint such number of standing and ad hoc committees as it
thinks fit to consider and report on any matter with which the Council is concerned.  
(2) Every committee appointed under the foregoing provisions of this paragraph shall be presided over by
a member of the Council and shall be made up of such number of other persons, not necessarily members of the
Council, as the Council may determine in each case.  
(3) The quorum of any committee set up by the Council shall be as may be determined by the Council.  
6. Where standing orders made pursuant to paragraph 1 of this Schedule provide for a committee of the Council to
consist of co‐opted persons who are not members of the Council, the committee may advise the Council on any
matter referred to it by the Council and the members thereof may attend any meeting of the Council for that
purpose.  
Miscellaneous
7. The fixing of the seal of the Agency shall be authenticated by the signature of the Director‐General of the
Agency.  
[1992 No. 59.]
8. Any contract or instrument which, if made by a person not being a body corporate, would not be required to be
under seal, may be made or executed on behalf of the Agency by the Director or by any other person generally or
specially authorised to act for that purpose by the Council.  
9. Any document purporting to be a contract, instrument or other document duly signed or sealed on behalf of the
Agency shall be received in evidence and shall, unless the contrary is proved, be presumed without further proof
to have been so signed or sealed.  
10. The validity of any proceedings of the Council or of a committee thereof shall not be adversely affected‐  
(a)   by any vacancy in the membership of the Council or any committee thereof; or  
(b)   by any defect in the appointment of a member of the Council or any committee thereof.  
11. Any member of the Council or a committee thereof who has a personal interest in any contract or arrangement
entered into or proposed to be considered by the Agency or committee thereof shall forthwith disclose his interest
to the Council or the committee and shall not vote on any question relating to the contract or arrangement.  
12. No member of the Council shall be personally liable for any act done or omission made in good faith while
engaged on the business of the Agency.  
____________________
FEDERAL ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY ACT
SUBSIDIARY LEGISLATION
____________________________
List of Subsidiary Legislation
1. National Environmental Protection (Effluent Limitation) Regulations.  
2. National Environmental Protection (Pollution Abatement in Industries and Facilities Generating   Wastes)
Regulations.  
3. National Environmental Protection (Management of Solid and Hazardous Wastes) Regulations.  
_____________________________
NATIONAL ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION (EFFLUENT LIMITATION) REGULATIONS
[S.I. 8 of 1991.]
under section 40
[15th August, 1991]  
[Commencement. ]
1. Installation of anti‐pollution equipment  
(1) Every industry shall install anti‐pollution equipment for the detoxification of effluent and chemical
discharges emanating from the industry.  
(2) An installation made pursuant to paragraph (1) of this regulation shall be based on the Best Available
Technology (BAT), the Best Practical Technology (BPT) or the Uniform Effluent Standards (UES).  
2. Waste water parameters  
(1) The selected waste water parameters for the industries specified in column 1 of the First Schedule to these
Regulations are set out in columns 2 and 3 respectively of the Schedule.  
[First Schedule.]
(2) The parameters shall be continuously monitored to ensure compliance with these Regulations.  
3. Treatment of effluent  
(1) An industry which discharges effluent shall treat the effluent to a uniform level as specified in the Second
Schedule to these Regulations to ensure assimilation by the receiving water into which the effluent is discharged.  
[Second Schedule.]
(2) The nearest office of the Federal Environmental Protection Agency shall be furnished from time to time with
the composition of any effluent treated as specified in paragraph (1) of this regulation.  
4. Additional sectoral effluent limitation treatment  
An industry specified in column 1 of the Third Schedule to these Regulations shall be subject to the additional
sectoral effluent limitations set out in columns 2 and 3 respectively of the Schedule.  
[Third Schedule.]
5. Penalty  
A person who contravenes a provision of these Regulations is guilty of an offence and liable on conviction to the
penalty specified in section 36 or 37 of the Federal Environmental Protection Agency Act.  
6. Short title  
These Regulations may be cited as the National Environmental (Effluent Limitation) Regulations.  
______________________
SCHEDULES
FIRST SCHEDULE
[Regulation 2.]
Important waste water parameters for selected industrial classifications
Column 1         Column 2         Column 3  
Industry           *Group 1           *Group 11    
(A) Aluminium industry   Suspended Solids, Free        Total Dissolved phenol,    
                    Chlorine Fluoride, phosphorus, oil      Aluminium      
         and Grease, PH
Automobile industry    Suspended Solids, Oil and  Crease,    COD,Chlorides,Nitrate, Ammonia,
     BOD5  Chromium, Tin, Phosphorus,    Sulphates, Tin, Lead, Cadmium,  
     Cyanide, Copper, Nickel, Iron, Zinc                                 Total Dissolved Solids                                                              
     and Phenol
(C)   Cane Sugar     BOD5, pH, Suspended       Alkalinity, Nitrogen, Total  
Processing     Solids, Settleable Solids,       Temperature, Total  
Industry       Total Coliform, Oil and       Dissolved Solids, Colour,  
     Grease, Toxic Materials       Turbidity, Foam.  
(D)   Canned and     BOD5, COD, pH         Colour, Faecal Coliforms,  
Preserved Fruits               Phosphorus, Total  
and Vegetables               Suspended Solids,  
Industry                 Temperature, Total Dissolved  
         Solids, Total Inorganic Carbon.  
(E)   Confined      BOD5 COD         Faecal Coliforms,  
Livestock Feeding               Nitrogen, Total Solids,  
Industry                 phosphate, pH, TOC.  
(F)   Beverage Industry     BOD5pH, Suspended       Alkalinity, Nitrogen,  
     Solids, Settleable Solids,       Phosphorus, Temperature,  
     Total Coliform, Oil and       Total Dissolved Solids,  
     Grease, Toxic Materials       Colour, Turbidity, Foam.  
(G)   Dairy Industry     BOD5, COD, pH,         Chlorides, Colour,  
     Suspended Solids         Nitrogen, Phosphorus,    
         Temperature, Total Organic      
        Carbon, Toxicity, Turbidity.  
(H)   Fertilizer      Ammonia, Chloride,       Calcium, COD, Gas  
Industry: Nitrogen     Chromium, Total         Purification Chemicals,  
Fertilizer Industry     Dissolved Solids, Nitrate,       Iron, Total Oil and  
     Sulphate, Suspended       Greases, pH, Phosphate,  
     Solids, Urea and other       Sodium, Temperature.  
     Organic Nitrogen Compounds, Zinc  
(I)   Phosphate     Calcium, Dissolved        Acidity, Aluminium,                                      
Fertilizer Industry    Solids, Fluoride, pH, phosporus    Arsenic, Iron, Mercury,  
     Phosphorus, Suspended       Nitrogen, Sulphate,  
     Solids, Temperature       Uranium.  
(J)   Flat Glass, Cement    COD, pH, Phosphorus,       BODS, Chromates, Zinc,                                  
Lime, Sulphate,     Suspended Solids,       Copper, Chromium, Iron, Tin,                    
Gypsum and                    Temperature         Silver Nitrate, Organic and   Asbestos
industries       Inorganic Water Breaking      
        Chemicals, Synthetic Resins, Total      
       Dissolved Solids.  
Cement, Concrete Lime   COD, pH, Suspended       Alkalinity, Chromates,    Zinc,                                  
and  Gypsum    Solids, Temperature        Sulphite, Total Dissolved Solids.                                
                    
Asbestos      COD, pH, TOC, Suspended Solids    Chromates, Phosphates, Zinc,
          Sulphite, Total Dissolved, Solids.  
(J)   Grain Milling Industry BOD5, Suspended Solids,       COD, pH, TOC, Total                                                            
     Temperature         Dissolved Solids.  
(K)   Inorganic Chemicals; Acidity/Alkalinity, Total       BOD5, COD, TOC,   Chlorinated                                                    
Alkaline and Chlorine Solids, Total Suspended        Benzeniods,Polynuclear                                 
Industry     Solids, Chlorides, Sulphates      Aromatics, Phenols, Fluorides,                                            
          Silicates, Total Phosphorus,    
         Cyanide, Mercury, Chromium,    
        Lead, Titanium, Iron, Aluminium,      
       Boron, Arsenic, Temperature.  
(L)   Leather Tanning   BOD5, COD, Chromium, Oil Grease, PH,     Alkalinity, Colour,   Hardness,                                                      
and Finishing   Suspended Solids,Total Solids      Nitrogen  Sodium Chloride   Industry  
        Temperature Toxicity.  
(M)   Meat Product   BOD5, pH, Suspended Solids, Settleable     Ammonia, Turbidity, Total   Industry  
Solids, Oil and Grease, Total  Coliform, Toxic    Dissolved Solids, Phosphates,    
Materials.       Colour.  
(N)   Metal Finishing   COD, Oil and Grease, Heavy, Metals,     None Specified.      
                     Suspended Solids, Cyanide  
(O)   Organic Chemicals BOD5, COD, pH, Total Suspended Solids,    TOC, Organic Chloride, Total l
Industry    Free‐ Floating Oil         Phosphorus, Heavy Metals,    
         Phenols, Cyanides, Total Nitrogen,    
        Other Pollutants.  
(P)   Petroleum   Ammonia, BOD5,           Chloride, Colour, Copper, Cyanide,                              
Refining Industry   Chromium, COD, Oil, pH, Phenols,Sulphides    , Iron, Lead Mercaptans, Nitrogen,  
    Suspended Solids, Temperature Total     Odour, Total Phosphorus, Sulphate,  
    Dissolved Solids         TOC, Toxicity,Turbidity, Volatile  
          Suspended Solids, Zinc.  
(Q)   Plastic Materials and    BOD5, COD, pH, Total     Total Dissolved Solids,                                            
Synthetics Industry     Suspended Solids, Oil and Grease,   Sulphates, Phosphorus,  Nitrate,                                       
      Phenols         , Organic Nitrogen, Ammonia,  
         Cyanides, Toxic Additives and    
        Materials, Chlorinated Benzeniods      
       and Polynuclear Aromatics, Zinc,        
      Mercaptans.  
(R)   Pulp and Paper Industry BOD5, COD, TOC, pH, Total Suspended    Nutrients (Nitrogen and Phosph‐                                  
    Solids,Coliform, Faecal Coliform, Colour, Heavy   orus,Total Dissolved Solids.                           
    Metals, Toxic Materials, Turbidity Ammonia, Oil                                                        
and Grease Phenols, Sulphide  
(S)   Steam Generation     BOD5, Chlorine, Chromate Oil, pH,      Boron, Copper, Iron  Non‐ degrad‐                                             
and Steam Electric    Phospate, Suspended Solids, Temperature able Organics, Total Dissolved Soli‐                
Power  Generation               ds, Zinc.
(T)   Steel Industry     Oil and Grease, pH, Chloride, Sulphates, None specified.                              
    Ammonia, Cyaides, Phenols, Suspended Solids,                                                                                            
    Iron, Tin, Temperature, Chromium, Zinc  
(U)   Textile Mill Products BOD5, COD, pH, Suspended Solids,    Heavy Metals, Colour, Oil  and                           
Industry        Chromium, Phenolics, Sulphide,     Grease, TotalDissolved  Sulphides
     Alkalinity       , Temperature, Toxic Materials.  
*Group I : Most significant parameters for which effluent limit will most often be set
. *Group II : Additional parameters.  
_______________________________
SECOND SCHEDULE
[Regulation 3.]
Effluent limitation guidelines in Nigeria for all categories of industries
      Units in milligram per litre
      (mg/l) unless otherwise stated  
Parameters       Limit for discharge into surface water    Limit for land water  
Temperature       Less than 40°C within 15         Less than 40 °C  
      metre of outfall  
   
Colour (Lovibond Units)         7            ‐‐‐ 
PH ……………………………………………..    6‐9         6‐9  
BOD5 at 20°C ………………………………    30 (30)         50 (50)  
Total suspended solids…………………………   30        ‐‐‐‐  
Total dissolved solids …………………………………. 2,000       2,000  
Chloride (as C1) ………………………………………………… 600       600  
Sulphate (as S042‐) …………………………………………………. 500       1,000  
Sulphide (as S
2
_)………………………………………………………  0.2       ‐‐‐‐ 
Cyanide (as CN‐)…………………………………………………   0.1       ‐‐‐ 
Detergents (Linear alkylate sulphonate as methylene blue                                                                                                          
active substance) ………………………………………………………15       15  
Oil and grease……………………………………………………   10       20 (20)  
Nitrate (as N03)…………………………………………………..   20       ‐‐ 
Phosphate (as P043‐) …………………………………………… 5       10  
Arsenic (as As)…………………………………………………..   0.1       ‐‐ 
Barium (as Ba) …………………………………………………….,   5       5  
Tin (as Sn) ……………………………………………………….. 10       10  
Iron (as Fe) ……………………………………………………………… 20      ‐‐  
Manganese (as Mn) ………………………………………………… 5       ‐‐ 
Phenolic compounds (as phenol) …………………………  .0.2       ‐ 
Chlorine (free) ………………………………………………………….1.0       ‐ 
Cadmium, Cd …………………………………………………….   Less than 1     ‐ 
Chromium (trivalent and hexavelent) …………    Less than 1     ‐ 
Copper…………………………………………………     Less than 1                     ‐ 
Lead …………………………………………………………… Less than 1    ‐  
Mercury……………………………………………………………………. 0.05       ‐ 
Nickel......................................       Less than 1     ‐ 
Selenium ………………………………………..    Less than 1     ‐ 
Silver …………………………………………………………………………….. 0.1       ‐ 
Zinc ………………………………………………………………………. Less than 1    ‐  
Total metals……………………………………………………….. 3       ‐ 
     Calcium (as Ca2+ ) ……………………………….    .200      ‐ 
     Magnesium (as Mg2+ ) ………………………………………..      200      ‐    
Boron (as B) ………………………………………………………….. 5    5    
Alkyl mercury compounds…………………………… Not detectable     Not detectable  
Polychlorinated Biphenyl (PCBs) ……. 0.003         0.003  
Pesticides (Total)………………………………………   Less than 0.01       Less than 0.01  
Alpha emitters, uc/ml......................................... 10‐7       ‐ 
Beta emitters, uc/ml.......................................   10‐6       ‐ 
Coliform (daily average) …………………………….   .400 MPN/100ml    500 MPN/100ml  
Suspended fibre …………………………………………………………….  ‐    ‐  
Third Schedule
[Regulation 4.]
NATIONAL EFFLUENT LIMITATIONS AND GASEOUS EMISSIONS GUIDELINES IN NIGERIA FOR SPECIFIC INDUSTRIES
Industry   Problems     Guidelines for concentration   Maximum  
       charge into       allowed for dis‐inland  
          waters  
Agricultural     Phosphate Fertilizer            Effluent (mg/l)  
Chemicals  
(Waste Water)…… Gypsum sludge…………………     Suspended solids ……………………………. 15  
    Acid waste water…………………….Phosphate (P043 _)……………………   3  
    High fluoride.................……….     Fluorides (F‐) ………………………………… 1  
    High phosphate………………………   pH ……………………………………….. 8‐9  
Nitrogenous Fertilizer
Similar problem ………………………………….Free Ammonia (as  NH4+ ) ……………….    0.1  
       Arsenic (as As) ……………………………… 0.1  
       PH ….…………………………………………… 6‐9  
       N03 ……………………………………..………  20  
Urea Fertilizer
    Similar problem………………………………..   Ammonia (as N) …………………….0.6  
        PH …………………………………………..6‐9  
    Pesticides         Total Pesticides Less than                                      
       Emission (mg/m3
)……………………. 0.1
   
Industry     Problems    Guidelines for concerntration     Maximum allowed                  
                 charge into       for disland waters
Agricultural      Phosphate Fertilizer         Effluent (mg/l                                                                          
Chemicals          
      Brewery
(Gaseous Emission)………..Particulate matter from                                                                                                                          
                blend‐ing and mixing ………………………………..Particulate………………………..  100  
               Fluorides …………………………………………….       Fluoride ………………………..       9.0  
               Ammonia vapours……………………………..       Ammonia ………………………..    3,600  
               Pesticide vapours.................................      Total Pesticides ………………..   100  
(Solid Wastes)………….. High volume gypsum from fertilizer                                                                                         
          manufacture  
         Effluent (mg/l)  
     Automotive Battery
             Total suspended solids  
       (TSS) ………………………………………………………… 28  
(Waste Water)…………………… Acid Waste Water …………. Oil and grease……………………………………… 10  
              pH ………………………………………………………   6‐9                                       
       Iron …………………………………………………….    0.20  
       Cadmium ……………………………………............ 0.01  
       Nickel    ................................................       0.05  
       Copper………………………………………………….   0.06  
       Lead ………………………………………………         0.01  
       Cobalt………………………………………………………..  0.5  
       Arsenic………………………………………………….   0.1  
(Gaseous Emission)………   Lead particulate  
(Solid Wastes) …………….. Defective battery casmg  
    Defective lead plates Brewery  
   
Industry     Problems    Guidelines for concerntration     Maximum allowed                  
                 charge into       for disland waters
Agricultural      Phosphate Fertilizer           Effluent (mg/l                                                                       
Chemicals          
      Brewery
    Alkaline effluent ………………………. Suspended solids ……………………… 15  
    High suspended solids………………………BODs ……………………………….. 30  
(Waste Water) …………..     High BOD……………………………………….. pH ………………………………………….     6‐9  
    High COD ………………………………………. COD……………………………………….       80  
(Solid Wastes)………………  Spent grain  
    Defective packaging materials  
    and labels  
    Broken bottles  
         Effluent (mg/l)  
     Dyestuffs and Dye Intermediates  
    Coloured effluent ………………………………  Suspended solids ……......... 5.0  
    High suspended solids  
(Waste Water)………………… High BOD …………………………………..            Zinc (as Zn)……………………  3.0  
    High COD …………………………………………        BOD5…………………………….. 15  
                    Oil and grease ……………   15  
(Gaseous Emission)………..    Organic vapour  
(Solid Wastes)…………………. Sludge  
          Effluent (mg/l)
      Food Processing  
             High BODs …………………………..    BOD5……………………………………………15  
         Oil and grease ……………. 15  
            Oil and grease………………………..    Suspended solids…………. 15  
Industry     Problems    Guidelines for concerntration     Maximum allowed                  
                 charge into       for disland waters
Agricultural      Phosphate Fertilizer         Effluent (mg/l                                                                          
Chemicals          
      Brewery
(Waste Water) …………………………….. High suspended solids……………………..   Particulate…………………….   100  
    Particulate matter from                                                                                                                           
     grain elevators, starch                                                                                               
    manufacturing, feed                                                                                                       
    and flour mills.  
(Gaseous Emission)………………. Odours from meat packing,                                                                                                          
     fish processing coffee roasting,                                                                                           
     starch manufacturing and rend‐                                                                                       
     ering some solid wastes.  
(Solid Wastes)  
Inorganic Chemicals
     Acid waste waters from                                                                                                    
    acid plants…………………………………    Suspended solids ………………….  15  
     Gypsum sludge from soda ash                                                                                                     
     plants …………………………………….. Chlorides ………………………………  100  
    Chlorides from soda ash ………….. Sulphates ………………………………  100    
   
     Plant and electrolytic Chlorine                                                                                        
    plant, mercury from electrolytic                                                                                            
    chlorine plants…………………….   pH ………………………………………… 6‐9     
                                                                                                
        Emission (ug/rn3
)
     Particulate matter from ce‐                                                                                         
    ment, soda ash and brick                                                                                                    
   plants ………………………………….. Particulates ………………………...  100  
     Fluorides ………………………………. Acetic acid ……………………       2,500  
(Gaseous Emission)…………….. Acid mist …………………………….. Fluorides……………………………..  100  
     S02
......................................   Hydrochloric acid…………………. 100  
     Chlorine (as C12) …………….. Nitric acid …………………………...    100  
     Noxfrom acid plants ……………… Hydrogen sulphide ………………….. 30  
    Industry     Problems    Guidelines for concerntration  
Maximum allowed                                    charge into    
for disland waters
Agricultural      Phosphate Fertilizer         Effluent (mg/l                                                                          
Chemicals          
      Brewery
        S02....................................  830  
        Nox ………………………………..  500  
(Solid Wastes)…………………………………..Sludges  
Effluent (mg/l)
Iron and Steel
(Waste water) ……………. High suspended solids………………….. pH …………………………………….. 55‐9.0  
    High phenols……………………………….  Suspended solids…………………… 15  
    High ammonia……………………………….. Ether solubles ……………………….10  
    High cyanides ………………………………… Phenol..............................   0.020  
    Spent pickle liquors ………………………..  NH3 as N……………………………  10  
    Rolling mill oils ……………………………..Cyanide (CN) …………………………0.1  
        Oil and grease…………………………1.5  
        Fe less than ……………………………..1.0.  
    Suspended particulate ………………… Particulate………………………………100.  
    Sulphur dioxide fromboilers,                                                                                                                
    sinter plant, coke ovens and                                                                                                                         
    blast furnace………………………………  SOx ………………………………………… 8.30
(Gaseous Emission)……… Furnace…………………………………….   NOx………………………………………. .500
(Solid Wastes)……………….Flue dust                                                                                                                                                      
                Slag Sludges  
         Effluent (mg/l)
Metal Working, Plating and Finishing
    Acids ………………………………………  Hg ……………………………………………0.01.  
    Cyanides ………………………………….. Cu …………………………………………..1.0.  
(Waste Water) ………………. Toxic metals ……………………………  Ni……………………………………………..1.0.  
    Cutting and machine …………….    Cr……………………………………………..1.0
        Zn …………………………………………………..1.0.  
        Pb …………………………………………………. 0.01
        Cd …………………………………………………..0.01  
        Sn …………………………………………………..1.0  
TSS …………………………………………………1.5.0  
        pH …………………………………………………5.5‐9.5.  
     Emission (ug/m3
)
(Gaseous Emission)…………Acid mist…………………………………… Chromic acid …………………………………….30
                  Alkaline mist…………………………………  Cyanide ………………………………………….1.150.   
               Cyanides,  fumes from anodizing,                                                                                                                 
             rust‐ proofing, cleaning,                                                                                                                                  
strpping, etc.., operations……………… Hydrogen chloride ………………………….100.  
        Fluorides………………………………………..806.  
Nitric acid …………………………………….100.  
        Phosphoric acid …………………………..100.  
(Solid wastes)……………………… Sludges containing metals  
Mining and Metallurgy
(Waste water)………………………High volume of suspended                                                                                                   
        solids from milling of ores                                                                                                                                 
          ( tailing)……………………….          Suspended solids ……………………………… 15  
.             pH………………………………………………………5.5‐9.0  Acid
wastes………………………    Cu………………………………………….   less than ………………………………………….. 1  
            Dissolved metals from high……..Zn less than……………………………………….. 1  
           Sulphide ores processing……….. Ni less than …………………………………………1  
           Radionuc1ide …………………………….Nd less than ………………………………………1  
           Radioactive effluent from …………Pb less than ……………………………………….1  
         Uranium mining tailings dis                                                                                                                        
         posal.............................................. Ra226          ...................................... 226/3pCiL  
         Emission (ug/m 3
)   
    Airbome dust crushing,                                                                                                                      
    grinding, etc generation                                                                                                                                        
    of arsine, acid fumes,                                                                                                                           
    ammonia vapour radon  
    gas and radioactivity                                                                                                                                       
    during uramum …………………….. Particulate ………………………………….100                                        
               Silica ……………………………………….    15  
               S02............................................    830  
              Ni ……………………………………………   5  
             Fe …………………………………………….   10  
             Cu ………………………………………….. 100  
(Gaseous Emisssion)………… Milling operations and dust                                                                                                                           
    during yellow cake handling                                                                                                                                           
    S02 generation fromsmelting                                                                                                       
    operation…………………………… Arsine……………………………………….. 10.  
            H2S04..........................................  100  
             RN03………………………………………   100  
             NH3 …………………………………… 600  
(Solid Wastes)………………….. Generation of waste rock                                                                                                                              
    and mine/mill waste  
Petroleum Refinery
(Waste Water) …………………. High waste volumes con                                                                                                                      
         taining:……………………………….. Temperatur (0C)………………………………..30.  
                pH ………………………………………………….. 6.5‐8.5  
        phenolics……………………………..  Oil and grease…………………………………….. 10  
    sulphides ……………………………….. Phenol (Total)………………………………….  0.5  
    oil and oil products …………………  Ammonia as NH/ +
4……………………………………….. 0.20  
    (waste water)                Sulphide (as H2S) ……………………………. 0.20  
                Total suspended solids…………………………. 30  
                BOD5…………………………………………………………………………..  
   10  
               COD …………………………………………………….. 40  
               Total chromium ………………………………….. 0.3  
                 Chromium (VI) less than……………………. 0.01  
                 Lead as pb2
+……………………………………   0.05  
               Cadmium less than………………………..      0.01  
           Cyanide less than ……………………………     0.01  
          Emission (ug/m3
)  
(Gaseous Emission)……………………….Particulates………………………….Particulate………………………………………… 500  
     Sulphur dioxide (S02) ............  S02......................................................  830  
     NOx………………………………….     NOx………………………………………………    500  
     H2S‐vapours …………………….     CO…………………………………………………. 5,000  
     NH3…………………………………………………….      H2S…………………………………………………  30  
     Hydrocarbon vapours ……..     Hydrocarbon…………………………….     5,000  
              Volatile Organic Carbon(VOC)…………… 6,000
    
(Solid Wastes)…………………………….   Oily chemical sludges, spent                                                                                             
    catalyst, discarded packaging                                                                                        
   materials.  
          Effluent (mg/l)  
      Petrochemicals  
(Waste Water)………………………………..High volume waste matter……… Temperature (0C)…………………………30
     Storm water…………………………………pH……………………………………………6.5‐8.5  
     Cooling water……………………………… oil and grease ……………………………….1
         Phenol ……………………………………….. 0.5.  
         Ammonia (NH/4
+
) …………………….. 0.2  
         Sulphide as H2S ……………………….. 0.2  
         Total suspended solids ………………..  30  
         BOD5…………………………………………………………… 10  
         COD ……………………………………………… 40  
         Lead as Pb2+ ……………………………….   0.05  
         Chromium (VI) …………………………….. <0.1  
         Cadmium as Cd2+............................................. <0.1  
          Emission (ug/m3
)  
(Gaseous Emission)…………………………….Particulate………………………………….. Particulate…………………………………500.  
          Carbon black dusts ………………………  Hydrocarbon…………..................5,000  
          SOx ……………………………………………………………………….   Volatile organic carbon  
     NOx………………………………………………  (VOC) ……………………………6,000  
     CO ……………………………………………… Benzene…………………….   1,500  
     Hydrocarbons (HC)…………………….   Xylene……………………………  2,300  
(Solid Wastes)…………………………   Benzene……………………………………….. Toluene……………………………2,300
     Xylene  
     Oily chemical sludges Off speck                                                                                       
    products: (carbon black:                                                                                                       
    polypropylene chunks)  
     Spent catalyst  
    Discarded packaging Material  
           Effluent (mg/l)  
Petroleum Exploration and Production Industry
(Waste Water………………………….   Produced formation …………………. Temperature (0C)……………………….. 35  
     Water………………………………………… pH…………………………………………… 6.5‐8.5  
     Oily waste waters …………………….   Oil and grease…………………………… 10
     Drilling fluids ……………………………   Total suspended solids ………………… 30
     Accidental spill of oil...................... BOD5………………………………………….. 10
         COD ……………………………………………… 40  
         Lead as Pb2+ …………………………..      0.05  
         Cr (VI) less than…………………………   0.1  
         Zinc as Zn2+ ……………………………… 1.0  
        Copper as Cu2+ …………………………..   1.5
         Cadmium as Cd2+ ……………………….. <0.5  
           Emission (ug/m3
)  
(Gaseous Emission)……………….. Hydrocarbon vapours drilling mud,                                                                                                    
             drilling cuttings, produced sand,                                                                                              
           domestic wastes,                                                                                                                                             
           oily sludges…………………………………        Hydrocarbon …………………………………  5,000  
(Solid Wastes)  
Industry     Problems    Guidelines for concerntration   Maximum allowed                  
                 charge into       for disland waters
Agricultural      Phosphate Fertilizer                                                                              
Chemicals          
           Effluent (mg/l)  
Pharmaceuticals
(Waste Water) ………………………………..None specified……………………….   BOD5………………………………………..   30  
         Total suspended solids……………….   25  
         pH ………………………………………………. 6‐9  
Plastic and Synthetics
(Waste Water)……………………………..  High BOD …………………………………. BOD5 ……………………………………….10.  
    High COD containing me                                                                                                            
    rcury, plasticiser and  PCBs……….   Total suspended solids…………….   30  
         (TSS)  
         COD ………………………………………… 40  
         Phenolics less than…………………..   0.50  
         Zinc less than……………………………   1.0  
         Chromium less than …………… 0.10  
         Oils and grease ………………… 10.0  
         Fluoride (F‐) less than …………….. 1.0  
         Copper (Cu2+) less than ……………. 0.05  
(Gaseous Emission)……………………. Volatile organic                                                                                                       
    Hydrocarbons  
(Solid Wastes) ………………………….     Waste plastic products  
Pulp and Paper
(Waste Water)……………………………..  High waste volumes containing:                                                                             
    suspended bark and fibre from                                                                                                                   
     debaking and paper operations;                                                                                                    
     fibres; spent liquors; wash waters                                                                                                              
     from bleaching process; taste and                                                                                          
     odour producing wastes …………………   BOD5 …………………………..15  
         COD …………………………………...100.  
         Suspended Solids …………………..30 .  
         Bleaching agent should not    
        be detectable  
         Settleable matter…………………… 30.  
           Emission (ug/m3
)  
     Particulates…………………………   Particulate …………………………………… 100.  
(Gaseous Emission)…………………….   Sulhur dioxide …………………………      Hydrogen sulphide (H2S) ……………… 100
     NOx from power boilers………….. Sulphur dioxide (S02) ……………………  830
         Calcium oxide, Calcium sulphate                                                                             
    particulate from lime kilns, Foul                                                                                            
    gases from digester blow tanks,                                                                                            
    Particulate and sulphur compo                                                                                                
    unds from recovery bodies………      Nitrogen oxides (No x) ………………… 500  
    
(Solid Wastes)………………………….   High volume of bark, sawdust                                                                                                                
     and clarifier sludge  
Rubber Manufacturing
Effluent (mg/l)  
     BOD ………………………………..        BOD5
………………………………………………….. 15.  
     Suspended solids
(Waste Water) ………………………       Toxic metals ……………………..    Total suspended solids  ……………………………. 30
                       pH …………………………………………………………6‐9
                 Lead (Pb) less than ………………………………. 1  
                Chromium less than …………………………………1.  
                 Zinc (Zn) less than ………………………………0.1.  
(Gaseous Emission)…………….. Foul Gases…………………………………….   Volatile Organic Carbon (VOC) …………2,000
(Solid wastes)…………………………..Waste latex
Effluent (mg/l)  
Service Industries
    Oily waste waters from maintainance                                                                                                                             
    shops fueling depots and washing                                                                                     
    platforms……………………………………….. BOD5………………………………………………15.  
        Oil and grease ……………………………………..10   
        COD   ……………………………………………….40
        Lead less than ........................................... 1.  
   
(Waste Water) ........................ High BOD wastes from tank                                                                                                                            
             car washing ............................   Total Chromium less  than…………………     0.3  
       Zinc (Zn) less than .................................... 0.1    
    Emission (ug/m3
)    
(Gaseous Emission)………………..Exhaust fumes from idling                                                                                                                 
            containing S02, N02 par                                                                                                                             
             ticulate .................................. Particulate ......................................…..100    
        Sulphur dioxide (S02) ........................... 830    
          Exhaust air from maintenance                                                                                                   
       shops containing particulate,                                                                                                                                 
         welding fumes, solvents, and                                                                                                         
          paint spray booths, etc ................ Nitrogen oxides(N0x)............................500    
        Toluene .......................................... 2,000    
        Xylene .................................................. 2,300  
       VOC .......................................................6,000    
      Benzene ...............................................1,500      
     CO ........................................................5,000        
    (hydrocarbons) ......................................500   
(Solid Wastes) ....................Rags, wood, soil impregnated                                                                                                            
    with oil or oily wastes due to                                                                                                            
    spills or accidents.        
    Effluent (mg/l)      
Soap and Detergent
(Waste Water) .....................High pH .............................   COD ............................................    40    
    Oil and grease ....................   BODs .........................................     15    
        Total suspended solids ................... <10    
        Oil and grease ................................... <10    
        pH ..................................................6‐9    
    Emission (ug/m3
)    
(Gaseous Emission)……………… Particulate matter .........................Particulate ................................... 100    
           Sulphur oxide ................................Sulphur dioxide ............................... 830    
(Solid Wastes) ........................ Packaging material        
    Effluent (mg/l)      
Sugar Processing
(Waste Water)……………………….High BOD5 ……………………………………… BOD5……………………………………….30.  
                    Suspended solids……………………….5
         pH……………………………………….6‐9.  
Emission (ug/m3
)  
(Gaseous Emission)……………….. Bagasse dust……………………………………. Particulate ……………………………. 500.  
              Press Cake Bagasse Bagasse ash  
Effluent (mg/l)  
Tannery
            Parameter    Chrome     Vegetable
(Waste Water)………………… High BOD5      BOD5    ………………………………………50 (15)*         100 (30)
             COD   …………………………………………164(40)*                     80(19)      
    Suspended solid                                                                                                                                             
   wastes from hide                                                                                                                                       
    washing  ………………    Suspended Solids…………………………30 (10)                   40 (19)                    
*Discharge into    High PHTotal…………    Total…………………………………………… 6‐9.        ……………   6‐9                                                  
small streams
    High sulphide Solid                                                                                                                            
    wastes from lime sulp‐                                                                                                                                                
    hide treatment of                                                                                                                                                
    Spent vegetable and                                                                                                                                         
    chrome tanning liquors                                                                                                                     
   Grease from rendering                                                                                                                  
operations  
       Chromium……. (iii)          0.3       2.0
       Chromium……. (vi) ..        0.1     0.1
       Floating matter …………………………..             Not to be visible
                     to naked eye.  
        Oil and grease ………………………………... 10  
        Chlorides (as Cl‐) ………………………………… 50.  
        pH …………………………………………………….. 6‐9.  
        Sulphide ……………………………………………. 1.  
        Odour     None     None
        Colour      None      None
Emission (ug/m3
)  
(Gaseous Emisiion)……….Particulate odour in                                                                                                                                   
                  boiler emissions …………………………. Particulate………………………………….… 100                             
                 Odour from plant process……………… Hydrogen Sulphide………………………….. 30                                                         
(Solid Wastes) ……………… Solids from screening, sludge  
Effluent (mg/l)  
Textile Mills
(Waste Water)………………… High pH…………………………………………PH………………………………………………69
    High suspended solids………………   BOD5 ……………………………………………. 20.  
    Colour …………………………………….    COD ………………………………………………… 8.  
        Suspended solids …………………………. 30  
        Chromium (vi) …………………………….. <0.10  
        Phenols............................................. 0.01  
        Sulphide …………………………………………… 0.20  
        Coliform 400MPN/…………………………… 100ml  
        Colour ……………………………………………….. None  
        Odour ……………………………………………..   None  
Emission (ug/m3
)  
(Gaseous Emission……..Particulate matter……………………….    Particulate……………………………………………. 100.  
(Solid Wastes) …………Sludge  
             Textile wastes  
*For discharge into small streams.  
_______________________________________
NATIONAL ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION (POLLUTION ABATEMENT IN INDUSTRIES AND FACILITIES
GENERATING WASTES) REGULATIONS
[S.1. 9 of 1991.]
under section 37
[15th August, 1991]  
[Commencement. ]
1. Restriction on the release of toxic substances  
No industry or facility shall release hazardous or toxic substances into the air, water or land of Nigeria's ecosystems
beyond limits approved by the Agency.  
2. Monitoring pollution units  
An industry or a facility shall‐  
(a)   have a pollution monitoring unit within its premises;  
(b)   have on site a pollution control; or  
(c)   assign the responsibility for pollution control to a person or body corporate accredited by the
Agency.  
3. Discharge monitoring report  
A discharge, including solid, gaseous and liquid waste from any industry or facility shall be analysed and reported
to the nearest office of the Agency every month, through a Discharge Monitoring Report.  
4. Unusual or accidental discharges  
An unusual discharge or accidental discharge of waste from any industry facility shall be reported to the nearest
office of the Agency not later than 24 hours of the discharge.  
5. List of chemicals  
An industry or facility shall submit to the nearest office of the Agency‐  
(a)   a list of the chemicals used in the manufacture of its products;  
(b)   details of stored chemicals and storage conditions;  
(c)   where chemicals are bought, sold or obtained, the name of any secondary buyer.  
6. Pollution Response Centre  
The State and zonal offices of the Agency shall serve as Pollution Response Centres for co‐ordinating pollution
response activities.  
7. Contingency plan  
An industry or a facility shall have a contingency plan approved by the Agency against accidental release of
pollutants.  
8. Machinery for combating pollution, etc.  
(1) An industry or a facility shall set up a machinery for combating pollution hazard and maintain
equipment in the event of an emergency.  
(2) An industry or a facility shall, for the purposes of paragraph (1) of this regulation, have a stock of
pollution response equipment which shall be readily accessible and available to combat pollution hazards in the
event of accidental discharges.  
9. Pollution emergency  
If there is a case of pollution emergency, the nearest office of the Agency shall serve as an "On‐the‐Scene
Co‐ordinator" to co‐ordinate all response activities.  
10. Storage treatment and transport of harmful toxic waste  
(1) No person or body corporate shall engage in the storage treatment and transportation of harmful toxic
waste within Nigeria without a permit issued by the Agency.  
(2) The permit shall be in such form as may be determined by the Agency.  
11. Generator's liability  
The collection, treatment, transportation and final disposal of waste shall be the responsibility of the
industry or facility generating the waste.  
12. Industrial layouts in each State  
(1) Each State of the Federation shall‐  
(a)   designate industrial layouts which shall be separate from residential areas; and  
(b)   provide buffer zones between industrial layouts and residential areas.  
(2) A buffer zone shall‐  
(a)   be rigidly kept away from developers;  
(b)   be monitored to prevent developing encroachment by developers.  
13. Strategies for waste reduction  
An industry or a facility, including those to be established after the commencement of these Regulations, shall
adopt in‐plant waste reduction and pollution prevention strategies.  
14. Restriction on new source of pollution  
(1) No new industry or facility shall commence production without compliance with the provisions of these
Regulations.  
(2) The Agency shall prevent an industry or facility from commencing operation where the Agency believes that
such industry or facility may constitute a new point source of pollution.  
15. Permissible limits of discharge into public drains, etc.  
(1) No effluent with constituents beyond permissible limits shall be discharged into public drains, rivers,
lakes, sea or underground injection without a permit issued by the Agency or any organisation designated by the
Agency.  
(2) No oil, in any form, shall be discharged into public drains, rivers, lakes, sea, or underground injection
without a permit issued by the Agency or any organisation designated by the Agency.  
(3) Application for a permit and the permit shall be in the Forms set out in the schedule to these
Regulations or as specified by the Agency.  
(4) The Agency may revoke a permit issued under paragraph (1) of this regulation if the Agency is
satisfied, after the due enquiry, that the industry or facility has not complied with any of the conditions specified in
the permit.  
(5) Revocation of a permit shall be in the Forms C and D set out in the Schedule to these Regulations or as
specified by the Agency.  
(6) An industry or a facility with a new point source of pollution or a new process line with a new point
source shall apply to the Agency for discharge permit not later than 180 days before commencing the discharge of
any effluent arising from any operation.  
16. Solid wastes to be disposed of in environmentally safe manner  
(1) Solid wastes generated by any industry or facility, including sludge and all by‐products, resulting from
the operation of pollution abatement equipment, shall be disposed of in an environmentally safe manner.  
(2) No industrial solid waste shall be disposed of in any municipal landfill.  
17. Release of gaseous matters  
An industry or a facility which is likely to release gaseous, particulate, liquid or solid untreated discharges shall
install, into its system, appropriate abatement equipment in such manner as may be determined by the Agency.  
18. Surroundings of factories  
The surroundings of a factory or facility shall be maintained to preserve their aesthetic and sanitary conditions.  
19. Safety of workers  
No industry shall expose an employee to any hazardous condition in his place of work.  
20. Forms  
The Forms set out in the Schedule to these Regulations shall be used for the purposes specified therein with or
without modification by the Agency.  
21. Environmental impact assessment, etc.  
The Agency shall demand environmental audit from existing industries and environmental impact assessment from
new industries and major developmental projects and the industries shall comply within 90 days of the receipt of
the demand.  
22. Penalty  
A person or body, whether corporate or unincorporate, who contravenes any provision of these Regulations shall
be guilty of an offence and liable on conviction to the penalty specified in section 35 or 36 of the Act.  
23. Short title  
These Regulations may be cited as the National Environmental Protection (Pollution Abatement in Industries and
Facilities Generating Wastes) Regulations 1991.  
_______________________
SCHEDULE
[Regulations 15 (3) and 20.]
FORM A
Application for Waste Discharges/Disposal Permit
1.   Name of company requesting permit ………………………………………………………………………………
    ……………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………….  
2.   Year of incorporation and Registration Number of business name …………………………………….
    …………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………  
3.   Location(s) of business premises (i.e. State, local government area, etc.)
…………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………..
…………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………
4. Result of quantitative and qualitative sampling of liquid, gaseous and solid effluent from factory
……………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………..
………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………….…
………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………….     
5. Description of plant facilities, out fall location(s), effluent characteristic(s) and production figures  (please
attach engineering drawings of layout of factory and process line) ………………………………...  
…………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………..
……………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………
6. A listing of all toxic substances used or manufactured on the site (For guidance, refer to Parts II and III
of FEPA 's Interim Guidelines)
……………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………
7.   Does the factory have any other permit issued to the facility? (State type) ……………….………………………
…………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………….    
8. Description of pollution abatement/monitoring facilities on site (including details of year of
installation, capacity, etc.) ………………………………………………………………………………………………………………..
………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………
9. Name and brief resume of FEPA accredited consultant(s), contractors involved with pollution control at
the facility (attach rèsumé if possible)    
………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………
………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………….…
10. Number and range of qualification and experience of staff involved with pollution control programme at
the facility   ……………………………….....................................................................................................................                                     
……………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………….
11.   A listing of all chemicals in use at the facility (trade names not acceptable)
……………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………
………………………………………………………………………………………..……………………………………………………………………………
12. For new sources: A submission of an environmental impact assessment report is mandatory. Request for
permit system must be made 180 days before discharge   commences, (attach photocopies of the relevant
documents)………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………..
13. A listing of all intermediates and final products at facility including details of storage condition( s)
………………………………………......................................................................................................................................               
………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………..
……………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………….
14.   Any safety/contingency plan? (submit details) …………………………………………………………………………………...
…………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………
………………........................................................................................................................................................................
.........................................................................................................................................................................  
15.   Distance of facility from residential area (include map) ………………………………………………………………………..
…………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………...  
16.   Distance from any other industry (state name of industry and direction)
……………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………..  
17. Present discharge (outfall) locations (illustrate) and position of inspection tap for compliance monitoring
………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………...
………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………
18. Volume of raw water consumption ………………………………………………………………………………………………………….  
19. Source of energy at facility and quantitative estimate of consumption on a monthly basis
………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………     
20.   Detailed description of waste disposal methods …………………………………………………………………………………
………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………….
21.   Any other information? ………………………………………………………………………………………………………..…………...  
Declaration
I declare that all the foregoing information is correct to the best of my knowledge.  
22.               ………….…………………………………………….
        Name of applicant or his attorney  
23.               ………………………………………………………..
         Designation  
24.              ……………………………………………………
               Signature      
       DATE ………………………………………….20………………………..………  
NOTE.‐  
Every application form for permit must be accompanied with N50.00 bank draft administration fee in the name of
the Federal Environmental Protection Agency.  
This Notice is for all private and public enterprises or facilities intending or already discharging any form of wastes
(solid, liquid or gaseous) into Nigeria's ecosystem (including waste disposal boards and mining and mineral
prospecting companies, on and off farm processing facilities, etc.).  
All applications duly processed will be issued with the discharge permit on or before 1 October 1991.  
Non‐possession of Federal Environmental Protection Agency Discharge Permit by 1 October 1991 shall be
tantamount to criminal violation of Federal Environmental Protection Agency Act.  
A permit shall be valid for two (2) years effective from 1 October, of the year of issue.  
     ________________________
FORM B
       P/No ……………………………………………………………………………
Industrial Waste Discharge/Disposal Permit  
The Director of the Federal Environmental protection Agency (FEPA), hereby grants an Industrial Waste Disposal
Permit, pursuant to an application for registration.  
DATED………………………………………………………………………… day of…………………………………………………20  …………………
in respect of the following‐  
Full name and address of permit holder …………………………………………………………………………………………………………….  
Location of site to which Permit relates   ……………………………………………………………………………………………………..  
Mode of discharge of disposal to which this Permit relates   …………………………………………………………………………..  
Type/volume/quality of waste/wastes/waste stream of which discharge or disposal is authorised …………………
………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………….
……………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………….…  
This Permit is granted subject to the following conditions‐  
……………………………………………………...        ……………………………………………………..
    Date          Name and Signature  
NOTES.‐  
1. The following conditions shall apply to industrial solid waste‐  
(a)   appropriate site preparation; and  
(b)   pre‐determination of‐  
    (i)   depth to groundwater;  
    (ii)   direction of groundwater flow;  
    (iii)   groundwater characteristics; available provisions for leachate containment;  
    (iv)   available provision for leachate containment, sampling and analysis.  
___________________
FORM C
Notice of Revocation of Permit
To: . ...............................................................................................................................................................              
…………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………….  
WHEREAS the Federal Environmental Protection Agency on…………………………………..20…………………………..  
granted you a waste Disposal/Discharge Permit relating to………………………………………………………………………  
………………………………………………………………………………..…………………………………………………………………….
AND WHEREAS the Federal Environmental Protection Agency is satisfied that the following condition(s) specified in
the Permit is/are not being complied with, namely‐  
.........................................................................................................................................................................................
.........................................................................................................................................................................................
....................................................................................................................................................................  
NOW THEREFORE the Federal Environmental Protection Agency hereby requires you to comply with the said
condition(s) before ……………………….
Failure to do so shall result in the revocation of the Permit.  
........................................................................   ………………………………………………………………………………          
……………………………………………………………….                         …………………………………………………..                    
Date                                Name and signature
........................................................................       …………………………………………………………….
    Name                 Designation
______________________
FORM D
Revocation Order
To:   …………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………….
........................................................................................................................................................................     
WHEREAS the Federal Environmental Protection Agency on………………………………. 20………………………………..  
granted you a waste Disposal Permit No…………………………… relating to........................................................
………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………….
AND WHEREAS it appears to the Agency that the continuation of activities to which the permit relates would cause
pollution or danger to public health or would be so seriously detrimental to the amenities of the locality affected
by the activities that the continuation of them ought not to be permitted and that the pollution , danger or
detriment cannot be avoided by modifying the conditions specified in the permit;
WHEREAS the Federal Enviromental Protection Agency dated…………………………….20…………………………………….
requiring you to comply with the following condition (s)…………………………………………………………………………
....................................................................................................................................................................…………………
……………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………  
before………………………………….. 20 …………………….was reserved upon you on ………………………..20……………………..  
and you have not complied with the said conditions within the said period‐
.................................................................................................................................................................................             
NOW THEREFORE the Federal Protection Agency hereby revokes the permit with effect from…………………………..
………………………………………….  
Signature  
........................................................................     ……………………………………………………………...  
    Name              Designation
FORM E
Certificate of Sampling
This is to certify that ………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………...  
(Name of Registered Plant)
discharging treated waste/storm water/solid waste into ……………………………………………………………………………...  
(identify point of discharge)
from a treatment plant …………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………..
(identify unit/code)
has collected water sample(s)/solid wastes samples from/at ……………………………………………………………………….   
………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………
(idenufy point of source)
on …………………………………………………………………………..     ……………………………………………………….  
Date           Time
Sample(s) has/have been taken to…………………………………………………………………………………………………………………  
    
(identify laboratory)
for the analyses of the following parameters‐  
(i)   …………………………………………………….…  (vi)    ………………………………………………………...
  
(ii)…………………………………………………    (vii) ………………………………………………………..   
(iii) ………………………………………………….   (viii) ……………………………………………………..    
(iv)……………………………………………………….    (ix) ………………………………………………………….    
(v) ……………………………………………………..   (x) ………………………………………………………..   
Sample Preservation Method ……………………………………………………………………………………………………………………..
Name and Signature of Sample Collector………………………………………………………………………………………………………….  
............................................................................  
    Official  
................................................................                                                                          
................................................................
Name and Signature of Company/                                                                                                                                                 
Officer in Charge  
__________________________________
NATIONAL ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION (MANAGEMENT OF SOLID AND
HAZARDOUS WASTES)
REGULATIONS
[S.1. 15 of 1991.]
under section 37
[30th December, 1991]
[Commencement. ]
PART 1
Objectives and designation of dangerous waste
1. Objectives of management of solid and hazardous waste  
The objectives of solid and hazardous waste management shall be to‐  
(a)   identify solid, toxic and extremely hazardous wastes dangerous to public health and    
environment;  
(b)   provide for surveillance and monitoring of dangerous and extremely hazardous wastes and  
    substances until they are detoxified and safely disposed of;  
(c)   provide guidelines necessary to establish a system of proper record keeping, sampling and  
labelling of dangerous and extremely hazardous wastes;  
(d)   establish suitable and provide necessary requirements to facilitate the disposal of hazardous  
wastes;  
(e)   research into possible re‐use and recycling of hazardous waste.  
2. Functions of appropriate Governmental agencies  
(1) All industries shall inform the Agency of all toxic, hazardous and radioactive substances which they keep in their
premises and/or which they discharge during their production process.  
(2) The Agency shall maintain an up‐to‐date register of all industries which keep toxic, hazardous and radioactive
substances or discharge toxic, hazardous and radioactive wastes.  
(3) The Agency shall prescribe to the relevant industries, factories or other institutions methods of controlling the
generation of toxic, hazardous and radioactive wastes.  
(4) The Agency shall maintain a register of banned toxic, hazardous and radioactive substances and inform relevant
industries, factories or institutions of the substances.  
(5) For the purpose of the disposal of toxic solid and hazardous wastes, the Agency shall‐  
(a)   monitor and ensure that industries, factories or other institutions which discharge toxic,  
hazardous and radioactive waste as listed in column of the First Schedule to these    
regulations, shall treat such hazardous wastes in the manner prescribed in the Second    
Schedule to these regulations;  
(b)   request from any industry on its register, information relating to the generation, handling,  
disposal of toxic, hazardous and radioactive wastes; it shall be unlawful for any industry to  
withhold any such information;  
(c)   employ scientific and human resources to monitor and control all phases of life cycle of all  
substances likely to have an adverse effect on human health and environment;  
(d)   determine and use the most advanced technology available for the disposal of toxic,    
hazardous and radioactive wastes;  
(e)   set up regional bodies or committees to serve as "dump watch" for transboundary movement of
toxic, hazardous and radioactive waste. The Agency shall prescribe necessary guidelines to the committees set up
pursuant to paragraph (e) ofthis regulation.  
(4). A solid waste shall be determined to be a dangerous waste or extremely hazardous waste if it conforms with
the provisions of regulation 6 of these Regulations and it is out of waste specified as dangerous in the list of
dangerous wastes specified in Schedule 6 to these Regulations.  
PART 2
Dangerous Waste List  
5. A waste shall be designated as discharged chemical product, if it is handled in any of the manners described in
Schedule 4 to these Regulations.  
6. Dangerous waste source  
(1) A waste shall be deemed to be dangerous waste if the waste appears in the list of dangerous waste contained
in F AC‐000‐000‐9903 as listed in Schedule 12 to these Regulations.  
(2) A waste shall be regarded as dangerous if it is‐  
(a)   waste which appears in the dangerous waste source list as listed in Schedule 12 to these  
Regulations;  
(b)   waste which is a residue from the management of a waste listed in the dangerous waste source
list in Schedule 12 to these Regulations and identified as "D.W"; and  
(c)   described in the footnotes of FAC‐000‐000‐9904 as an extremely hazardous waste in the
hazardous and dangerous waste sources list in Schedule 13 to these Regulations.  
(3) Any waste appearing in the dangerous waste list shall be designated as exclusively hazardous waste (EHW).  
7. Dangerous waste mixtures  
Infectious dangerous wastes shall include but not be limited to infectious waste specified in Schedule 5 to these
Regulations.  
8. (1) Any waste whose constituents and concentration are known and which has not been designated as‐  
(a)   a discarded chemical product;  
(b)   an infectious dangerous waste;  
(c)   a dangerous waste source,  
shall be deemed as a dangerous waste mixture to which the provisions of these Regulations shall apply.  
(2) A dangerous waste mixture shall also be determined as dangerous if‐  
(a)   the category or degree of toxicity for each known constituent in the waste is known; or  
(b)   each known constituent in the waste is a halogenated hydrocarbon or a polycyclic aromatic
hydrocarbon with greater than three rings and less than seven rings; or  
(c)   each known constituent of the waste is regarded by the International Agency for Research on
Cancer (IARC) as human or animal positive or a suspected carcinogen.  
(3) Any person who has a dangerous waste material shall use data available to him to determine the extent of
toxicity in the waste.  
(4) Where the data available to the person who has the dangerous waste is inadequate to determine the extent of
toxicity, the person concerned shall apply to the Agency or its employees to determine whether the waste is
contained in the Exclusive List of Registered Dangerous Substances in the Register with the Agency.  
9. Determination of toxicity in waste  
(1) The toxicity category for each toxic constituent in a waste shall be determined by referring to the FEPA
Register and by checking this data against Schedule 6 to these Regulations.  
(2) Where the toxic constituent classified under more than one of the four toxicity categories (Aquatic, Oral,
Inhalation or Dermal), the toxic constituent shall be assigned to the most acutely toxic category represented.  
(3) The category of toxicity in a waste shall be determined in accordance with the toxicity category table in
Schedule 6 to these Regulations.  
10. Categorisation of toxic waste  
(1) The degree of toxicity shall be categorised according to the formula prescribed in the Schedule 6 to
these Regulations.  
(2) If a person has established the toxicity of his waste by means of the Bioassay test methods and has
determined his waste toxicity's range, then he shall designate his waste according to the Toxic Dangerous Waste
Designation in Schedule 7 to these Regulations.  
11. Persistent hazardous dangerous wastes  
(1) Wastes which contain halogenated hydrocarbons (HH) and/or polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons with
more than three rings and less than seven rings (PAH) shall be determined by the procedure specified in these
Regulations.  
(2) A person shall determine the concentration of (HH) and/or (PAH) in his waste by either testing his
waste as specified in (a) of this sub‐paragraph or by the calculation procedures described in (b) of this sub‐
paragraph, that is‐  
(a)   concentration tests: A person shall test his waste to determine its concentration level as  
stated in sampling and testing method below;  
(b)   concentration calculations: if a person can demonstrate to FEPA beyond a reasonable doubt that
any remaining persistent constituents for which he does not know the concentrations of would not contribute
significantly to the total persistent concentration of his waste then he may calculate this concentration as follows:  
(3) A person whose waste contains one or more halogenated hydrocarbons for which the concentrations are
known shall determine his total halogenated hydrocarbon concentration by summing the concentration
percentages for all of his waste's significant halogenated hydrocarbons.  
12. Carcinogenic dangerous wastes  
(1) A substance listed as an IARC (International Agency for Research on Cancer) human or animal positive or
suspected carcinogen and is an inorganic, respiratory, carcinogen shall be a carcinogenic substance provided it
occurs in a triable format (that is, if it is a waste which easily crumbles and forms dust which can be inhaled).  
(2) Any person whose waste contains one or more IARC carcinogen(s) and if‐ 
(a) the monthly or batch waste quantity exceeds 100kg; or  
(b) the concentration of anyone positive (human or animal) carcinogen exceeds 1.0 per cent of the waste
quantity‐  
(i)   shall designate such waste as EHW (and such designation shall be determined by (i), (ii), (iii));  
(ii)   the concentration of anyone IARC positive (human or animal) carcinogen exceeds  
    0.01 per cent of the waste quantity, such waste shall be designated DW; or  
    (iii)   the total concentration summed for all IARC positive and suspected (human or   
    animal) carcinogens exceeds (1.0 per cent of the waste quantity) such waste shall be    
designated DW;  
(c)   a substance shall not be carcinogenic if it is rated as IARC human or animal positive or    
suspected carcinogen merely because of studies involving implantation of the substance into  
the animals as site cause for the IARC rating.  
13. Characteristic to determine solid waste as a dangerous waste  
A solid waste shall be regarded as dangerous waste by determining any of the following parameters‐  
(a)   ignitability;  
(b)   corrosivity;  
(c)   reactivity;  
(d)   extraction procedure toxicity (EPTOX);  
(e)   halogenated hydrocarbons concentration;  
(f)   polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon concentration (PAH);  
(g)   static acute fish toxicity test;  
(h)   acute oral rate toxicity test;  
(i)   polychlorinated Dibenzo p‐dioxins and dibenzofurans concentrations;  
(j)   polychlorinated Biphenyls (PCB's).  
14. Methods and tests to determine representative samples  
(1) The method used for obtaining representative samples of a waste shall vary with the type and form of the
waste.  
(2) The Agency shall consider such representative samples using any of the sampling methods.  
(3) If the waste samples have properties similar to the characteristics mentioned in regulation 13 of these
Regulations and the materials indicated therein can cause any of the reactions indicated in regulation 13 of these
Regulations then the waste shall be considered as a dangerous waste as described in paragraph (2) of this
regulation.  
(4) The following methods shall be used by the Agency to determine representative samples as waste, that is‐  
(a)   crushed or powdered material‐ASTM standard method (D346‐75);  
(b)   extremely viscous liquid‐ASTM standard method (D 140‐70);  
(c)   flash‐like material‐ASTM standard method (D22234‐ 7 6);  
(d)   solid‐like material‐ASTM standard method (D 1452‐65);  
(e)   solid or rock‐like materials‐ASTM standard method (D420‐69);  
(f) containerised liquid waste (COLIW ASA) described in "Test Methods for the evaluation of  
solid waste, Physical/Chemical Methods" SW‐846 USEPA (1985);  
(g)   liquid waste in pits, ponds, lagoons and similar reservoirs‐"Pond sampler" described in "Test  
methods for the evaluation of solid waste, Physical/Chemical Methods" SW‐846, USEP A  
(1985).  
15. Ignitability test  
(1) A solid waste is ignitable if its representative sample has any of the following properties, that is‐  
(a)   it is liquid, other than an aqueous solution containing less than 24 per cent alcohol by    
volume and has a flash point of less than 60°C as defined by Pensky‐Mertens Close cup    
Tester using the test method specified in ASTM standard D‐93‐ 79 or D 93‐80, or a seta flash  
closed cup tester using method specified in ASTM Standard D‐3278;  
(b)   it is not a liquid and is capable, under standard temperature and pressure, of causing fire  
through friction, absorption of moisture or spontaneous chemical changes and, when    
ignited, s so vigorously and persistently that it creates a hazard;  
(c)   it is an ignitable compressed gas;  
(d)   it is an oxidiser.  
(2) An ignitable solid waste not designated as dangerous waste under any of the Agency's Dangerous Waste Lists
or the Agency's Dangerous Waste Criteria shall be assigned the dangerous waste number FD‐001.  
16. Corrosive testing  
(1) A solid waste is corrosive if its representative sample has any or more of the following properties, that is‐  
(a)   it is aqueous and has a (pH) less than or equal to 2 or greater than or equal to 12.5 as    
determined by a (pH) meter using method 5.2 in Test Method for the evaluation of solid  
waste, (Physical/Chemical methods);  
(b)   it is a liquid and corrodes steel (5AE 1020) at a rate greater than 6.35mm per year at a test  
temperture of 55°C as determined by standard Test Method 01‐69 as standardised in "Test  
Methods for the evaluation of solid waste, (Physical/Chemical methods)";  
(c)   it is a solid or semi‐solid, and when mixed with an equal weight of water results in a solution,  
the liquid portion of which has the property specified in such paragraph (a) of this regulation.  
(2) A corrosive solid waste not designated as a dangerous waste under any of the Agency Exclusive List of
Dangerous Substances listed in Schedule 12 to these Regulations or has any of the characteristics of Dangerous
Waste Criteria listed in regulation 13 of these Regulations shall be designated DW and shall be assigned the
dangerous waste number FD‐002.  
17. Reactivity test  
(1) A solid waste exhibits the characteristic of reactivity if a representative sample of the waste has any of the
following properties, that is‐  
(a)   it is normally unstable and readily undergoes violent changes, without detonating;  
(b)   it reacts violently with water;  
(c)   it forms potentially explosive mixtures with water;  
(d)   when mixed with water, it generates toxic gases, vapours or fumes in a quantity sufficient to  
pose danger to human or animal health or the environment;  
(e)   it is a cyanide or sulfide bearing waste which when exposed to (pH) conditions between 2  
and 12.5 can generate toxic gases, vapours or fumes in a quantity sufficient to present a  
danger to human or animal health or the environment.  
18. Solid waste exhibiting characteristic of toxicity  
Where a solid waste exhibiting the characteristic of EP toxicity is not designated a dangerous waste under any of
the Agency's Dangerous Waste List or Dangerous Criteria, it shall be assigned to the Agency's dangerous waste
number specified in Schedule 9 to these Regulations which corresponds to the toxic constituent causing it to be
dangerous.  
19. Generic dangerous waste numbers  
A waste which exhibits any of the dangerous waste characteristics lists in Schedule 8 to these Regulations shall be
assigned the dangerous waste number corresponding to the characteristic exhibited by the waste as shown in
Schedule 9 to these Regulations.  
PART 3
Spills and discharges into the environment
20. Notification of discharge of waste  
(1) Any person who intentionally or accidentally spills or discharges or causes to be spilled or discharged any
quantity of dangerous waste or hazardous substance, detrimental to public health or the environment shall,
(within 24 hours of the commencement of the spillage), notify the nearest "FEPA" Office or State environmental
protection body and local government council of the area of the spillage.  
(2) The Agency, or any person or authority authorised in that behalf shall do any or all of the following, that is‐  
(a)   instruct the person responsible for the spillage or discharge to clean up all released    
dangerous harmful wastes or hazardous substances within the time or days as may be    
specified;  
(b)   designate and treat, store or dispose of all solids, water or other materials contaminated by  
the spillage or discharge in accordance with specific directives given in that behalf by the  
Agency or any person or authority authorised in that behalf to issue the directive;  
(c)   restore the area affected by the spillage or discharge and replenish resources in a manner  
acceptable to the Agency or any other person or authority authorised in that behalf by the  
Agency;  
(d)   where immediate removal or temporary storage of spilled or discharged dangerous wastes  
or hazardous substances is necessary to protect human health or the environment, the    
Agency may direct that it be removed by competent transporters.  
21. Waste quantity  
(1) When measuring the weight of a dangerous waste, the Agency or any person or authority authorised by it in
that behalf shall consider only the weight of the residues and shall disregard the weight of the containers and
innerliners thereof.  
(2) A container or inner liner shall be considered to be "empty"‐  
(a)   when all wastes in it have been taken out using practises commonly employed to remove  
materials from that type of container or inner liner whichever quantity is least, until less than  
2 cm of waste remains at the bottom of the container or innerliner‐  
    (i)   innerliner, the volume of waste remaining in the container or innerliner is equal to  
    one per cent or less of the container's total capacity; or  
    (ii)   if the containers total capacity is greater than 416 litres the volume of waste    
    remaining in the container or innerliner is no more than 0.3 per cent of the      
container's total capacity;  
(b)   when a container which holds compressed gas is empty, then the pressure inside the container
equals or nearly equals atmospheric pressure.  
22. Containers damaged by liquids  
(1) Containers that may be damaged by liquids (e.g. cardboard, fibre containers without innerliners) may
be vacuum‐cleaned.  
(2) Strike the openend of the container up, thrice on the ground, using a hammer or hand to remove base
particles and vacuum‐clean again.  
(3) The equipment used for such vacuum‐cleaning shall be decontaminated in the manner approved by
the Agency or person or authority authorised by it in that behalf before such containers are destroyed or disposed
of.  
23. Over‐packed containers  
Small containers of dangerous waste may be placed in over‐packed drums (or labpacks) provided the following
conditions are met, that is‐  
(a)   hazardous waste shall be packaged in non‐leaking inside containers designed and    
constructed of a material that does not react dangerously when decomposed or ignited by  
the dangerous waste and to minimise voids, inside containers shall be full, tightly and    
securely sealed and shall contain very little air inside them;  
(b)   the inside containers shall be over‐packed in an open head metal shipping container at no  
more than 614 litres capacity and surrounded by a sufficient quantity of absorbent material  
to completely absorb all the liquid contents of the inside packing;  
(c)   the absorbent material referred to in paragraph (b) of this regulation shall not be capable of  
reacting dangerously when being decomposed or ignited by the contents in the containers.  
24. Manifest system  
There shall be a manifest system which shall include the following requirements‐  
(a)   Packaging‐the generator of the waste shall package all dangerous waste for transportation in  
accordance with the directives of the Agency or its authorised officers;  
(b)   Labelling‐the generator of the waste shall label each package in the manner prescribed by  
the Agency;  
(c)   Marking‐the generator of the waste shall mark each package of dangerous waste with the
following or equivalent words and information, very well displayed, that is‐  
      HAZARDOUS WASTE  
Federal and State laws prohibit improper disposal, if found, contact the nearest FEPA Zonal Office, Police or Public
Health Authority.  
      Generator's name and address
…………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………
…………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………
…………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………
Manifest document number
……………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………  
(d)   the generator of the waste shall provide bold warning signs to the transporter( s) as may be
prescribed by Agency.  
25. Duties of owners and operators receiving dangerous waste  
(1) Owners and operators who received dangerous waste accompanied by manifest from off‐site sources shall‐  
(a)   sign and date each copy of the manifest to certify that the dangerous waste covered by the  
    manifest was received;  
(b)   note any significant discrepancies in the manifest;  
(c)   immediately, deliver at least one copy of the signed manifest to the transporter;  
(d)   within thirty days after the delivery, send a copy of the manifest to the generator of the   
waste;  
(e)   retain at the place of delivery a copy of each manifest for at least three years from the date  
of delivery.  
(2) If an owner or operator of a facility receives dangerous waste whose manifest or shipping paper contains
discrepancies from a transporter, it shall notify the generator as well as Agency or its designated officer within 21
days from the receipt of the dangerous waste.  
26. Discrepancies manifest  
(1) Discrepancies in manifest shall be regarded as significant differences between the quantity or type of
dangerous waste designated on the manifest or shipping paper and that actually received if‐  
(a)   significant discrepancies in quantity and variations are greater than ten per cent in weight for  
bulk quantities (e.g. any tanker, trucks, rail‐road tank cars, etc.) or any variations in    
numerical figures for non‐bulk quantities (i.e. any missing container or package);  
(b)   significant discrepancies in type are obvious physical or chemical differences which can be  
discovered by inspection or waste analysis (e.g. waste solvent substituted for waste acid);  
(c)   there appears in the manifest obvious omission of FEPA or State identification numbers,  
generator certification or signature from the manifest.  
(2) Upon discovering a significant discrepancy, the owner or operator of a facility to which a dangerous
waste has been delivered shall attempt to reconcile the discrepancies with the waste generator or transporter.  
(3) Where the owner or operator fails to resolve the discrepancies with the generator or transporter
within fifteen days after receiving the waste, the owner or operator shall immediately notify the Agency by sending
a copy of the manifest or shipping paper at issue, describing the discrepancies and attempts made to reconcile it.  
27. Non‐acceptance of dangerous waste shipments  
(1) Dangerous waste shipments shall be rejected on the following grounds if‐  
(a)   any or all of the facility to which the waste was delivered could not properly manage the type  
of dangerous waste which was in the shipment;  
(b)   there is a significant discrepancy between the shipment and the waste listed on the manifest  
or shipping papers; or  
(c)   the shipment arrived in a condition which the owner or operator of the facility believes    
would present an unreasonable hazard to facility operations or facility personnel handling  
the dangerous waste.  
(2) If the owner or operator is unable to handle the waste he may send the shipment on to the alternate
facility designated on the manifest or shipping paper or contact the generator of the waste who will identify
another facility capable of handling the waste and provide for its delivery to that other facility.  
(3) If however, the containers are in such a condition as to present a hazard to public health or the
environment in the process of further transportation a contingency plan shall be put in operation.  
28. Preparedness and prevention  
Facilities for the reception, treatment or disposal of dangerous wastes shall be designed, constructed, maintained
and operated in such manner‐  
(a)   to prevent, or to minimise the possibility of fire, explosion, sudden or non‐sudden release of  
dangerous waste or its constituents;  
(b)   to prevent its exposure to air, soil, or ground water which could threaten public health or the
environment.  
29. Except ifit can be demonstrated to FEPA that none of the hazards posed by waste handled at the facility would
necessitate their usage, all facilities, waste reception, treatment or disposal shall be equipped with the following,
that is‐  
(a)   an internal communication or alarm system capable of providing immediate emergency   
instructions to personnel employed or engaged within the premises, building or precinct of  
the facility;  
(b)   a device, such as a telephone or hand‐held two‐way radio capable of summoning emergency  
assistance from the police and service departments or State or local government on‐the‐ 
scene co‐ordinator (OSC);  
(c)   portable fire extinguishers, fire equipment, spill control equipment and decontamination  
equipment; and  
(d)   water at adequate volume and pressure to supply water, hose streams, foam‐producing  
equipment, automatic sprinklers or water‐spray systems.  
30. All communications or alarm systems, fire‐protection equipment, spill‐control equipment and decontamination
equipment, installed with waste‐reception facility shall be tested and maintained as and when necessary to assure
their proper operation and functioning in times of emergency.  
31. Access to communications or alarms  
Whenever dangerous waste is being poured, mixed, spread or otherwise being handled, facility personnel shall
have immediate access to signalling devices such as‐  
(a)   internal or emergency communication device;  
(b)   telephone or hand‐held, two way radio (capable of summomng external emergency    
assistance) .  
32. Aisle space  
The owner or operator shall maintain aisle space to allow the unobstructed movement of personnel, fire
protection equipment, spill‐control equipment and decontamination equipment to any area of the facility
operation at all times and particularly in an emergency.  
33. Arrangement with local organisations and Agencies  
(1) The owner or operator of waste generating facility shall notify the Agency that he has made the following
arrangement‐  
(a)   familiarise the police, fire services department or any emergency response team and other  
such members of the local response team with the layout of the facility, the properties of  
dangerous waste or hazardous substances handled at said facility and places where facility  
personnel would normally be working, entrances to and roads inside the facility and possible  
evacuation routes;  
(b)   familiarise local hospitals with the properties of dangerous waste or hazardous substances  
handled at the facility and the type of injuries or illness which could result from fires,    
explosions or emissions at the facility;  
(c)   where more than one party might respond to an emergency, reach agreement with the   
others to provide support to the primary emergency authority;  
(d)   notify the designated "OSC" in the event of any emergency, who will then co‐ordinate    
response activities by the local response teams.  
(2) The owner or operator of a waste facility shall notify the Agency of all the arrangements and agreements
entered into with the person or authorities mentioned in sub‐paragraphs (a) to (d) of paragraph (1) of this
regulation unless the hazards posed by the waste or substance handled at the facility, would not require those
arrangements.  
(3) Where the waste or substance handled at the facility would not required the arrangements under paragraph
(2) of this regulation, prior opportunity to assess the facility to confirm this shall be given to the Agency or its
authorised officer to exempt the facility from the arrangement.  
(4) The Agency shall regularly be permitted to continuously determine that the situation in the facility remains
constant.  
34. Failure to enter into arrangements  
Where the Agency State or local government decline to enter into arrangement under regulation 33 of these
Regulations, are the owner or operator shall enter the refusal in the operating record and the onus of proof of that
refusal shall rest with the owner or operator.  
PART 4
Contingency plan and emergency procedure
35. Contingency plan  
(1) An owner or operator of a facility shall develop a contingency plan to lessen the potential impact on public
health and the environment in the event of an emergency, including a fire, sudden or non‐sudden release of
dangerous waste or its constituents or hazardous substances to air, soil, surface water or ground water.  
(2) Each owner or operator shall have an on‐site and off‐site contingency plan at his facility for use in the
emergencies mentioned in paragraph (1) of this regulation which threaten public health and the environment.  
(3) The on‐site plan shall conform to the provisions of regulation 28 of these Regulations relating to preparedness
and prevention while the off‐site contingency plan shall be drawn up to integrate the right of the community
within the areas known to the potential dangers in the activities being carried on the facility.  
(4) The community within the area where a facility is located shall be aware of the potential dangers of sudden or
non‐sudden discharges and all activities to mitigate any emergencies arising from the facility.  
36. Contents of contingency plans, etc.  
(1) The contingency plan shall contain the following that is‐  
(a)   a description of the actions to be taken by facility personnel to comply with provisions of  
these Regulation;  
(b)   a description of the actions to be taken when a dangerous waste shipment, which is    
damaged or presents a hazard to public health and the environment and unacceptable to the  
owner, arrives at the facility, but cannot be immediately transported or disposed of without  
causing danger to human health and the environment or the effect of which may result in  
the emission, of fire or explosion.  
(2) In the event of any of the contemplated under subparagraph (1) ofthis regulation, report of the findings of the
owner or operator of the facility shall be submitted to the Agency.  
(3) The emergency co‐ordinator's report shall include‐ 
(a)   the name and telephone number of the reporter;  
(b) the name and address of facility;  
(c) the time and type of incident (e.g. emission, fire);  
(d) the name and quantity ofmaterial(s) involved to the extent known;  
(e) the extent of injuries, if any; and  
(f) the possible hazards to human health or the environment outside the facility.  
(4) The emergency co‐ordinator for a facility shall‐  
(a) take all reasonable measures to ensure that fires, explosions, and emissions do not occur;  
(b) whenever any of these occurs, the co‐ordinator shall take steps to contain the spread of any  
fire, explosion or emission to other dangerous waste;  
(c)   stop processes and operation at the facility;  
(d)   collect and contain released waste or hazardous substances; and  
(e)   remove or isolate all containers within the facility.  
(5) Ifthe facility stops operations to fire, explosions or emission, the emergency co‐ordinator shall monitor leaks,
pressure build up, gas generation or ruptures in valves, pipes or other equipment in the facility.  
(6) Immediately after an emergency, the emergency co‐ordinator shall provide for treating, storing or disposal of
recovered waste, contaminated soil, surface water or any other material that results from a release, fire or
explosion at the facility.  
(7) The emergency co‐ordinator shall ensure that, in the affected area(s) of the facility‐  
(a)   no waste that may be incompatible with the released material is treated, stored, or disposed  
of until clean‐up procedures are completed; and  
(b)   all emergency equipment listed in the contingency plan are cleaned and made fit for their  
intended re‐use before operations are resumed.  
37. Contents of the contingency plans  
(1) The contingency plan shall contain the following particulars that is‐  
(a)   a description of the arrangements agreed to by local police and fire service departments,  
hospital, contractors, zonal or State response teams to co‐ordinate emergency services;  
(b)   a current list of names, addresses and phone numbers (office and residence) of all persons  
qualified to act as the emergency co‐ordinator in accordance with the provisions of the    
Agency's directives;  
(c)   an up‐to‐date list of all emergency and response equipment required at the facility such as‐  
    (i)   fire extinguishing system;  
    (ii)   spill control equipment;  
    (iii)   communication equipment;  
(d)   an evacuation plan for facility personnel where necessary describing the signal(s) to be used  
to begin evacuation, evacuation routes and alternate evacuation routes.  
(2) In addition, the plan shall include the location, physical description of each item on the list and a brief outline of
its capabilities; and  
(3) A copy of the contingency plan and all revisions to the plan shall be‐  
(a)   maintained at the facility; and  
(b)   submitted to the designated OSC and all members of the State or local response team.  
(4) The owner or operator shall review and immediately amend the contingency plan, if necessary, whenever‐  
(a)   applicable regulations or the facility permit are revised;  
(b)   the plan fails in an emergency;  
(c)   the facility changes (in its design, construction, operation, maintenance or other    
circumstances) in a way that materially increases the potential for fires, explosions, or    
release of dangerous waste constituents or hazardous substances, or in a way that changes  
the response necessary in an emergency;  
(d)   the list of emergency co‐ordinator changes; or  
(e)   the list of emergency equipment changes.  
(5) At all times, there shall be at least one employee either on the facility premises or on call with the
responsibility for co‐ordinating all emergency response measures.  
(6) This emergency co‐ordinator shall be thoroughly familiar with all aspects of the facility's contingency
plan required by the Agency, all operations and activities at the facility, the location and properties of all waste and
hazardous substances handled, the location of all records within the facility layout and all other aspects of the
facility's plan required by the Agency for contingency control.  
(7) In addition, the emergency co‐ordinator shall have the authority of the owner or operator of the
facility to commit the resources needed to carry out the contingency plan.  
(8) The emergency co‐ordinator for a facility shall take all reasonable measures to ensure that fires,
explosions, and releases do not occur or spread to other dangerous waste by stopping processes and operations,
collecting and containing released waste or hazardous substances and removing or isolating containers.  
(9) If the facility stops operations in response to fire, explosion or release the emergency co‐ordinator
shall monitor for leaks, pressure build up, gas generation or ruptures in valves, pipes or other equipment.  
(10) Immediately after an emergency, the emergency co‐ordinator shall provide for treating, storing, or
disposing of recovered waste, contaminated soil or surface water or any other material that results from a release,
fire or explosion at the facility.  
(11) The emergency co‐ordinator shall ensure that, in the affected area of the facility, no waste that may
be incompatible with the released material is treated, stored or disposed of until clean‐up procedures are
completed and all emergency equipment listed in the contingency plan are cleaned and made fit for their intended
re‐use before operations are resumed.  
(12) The owner or operator shall notify the Agency or any appropriate local government that the facility is
in compliance with regulation 37 (10) of these Regulations before operations are resumed in the affected area of
the facility.  
38. Emergency proceedings  
(1) In the case of an imminent or actual emergency, the emergency co‐ordinator shall promptly notify all
the personnel within the factory premises and mobilise all the necessary equipment to deal with the emergency
situation.  
(2) He shall also inform the Agency, if the release or outcome of the emergency would endanger human
health or the environment outside the factory or facility.  
(3) The report of the emergency co‐ordinator shall contain the following particulars, that is‐(i) the name
and telephone number of the reporter;  
    (ii)   the name and address of the facility;  
    (iii)   the time and type of incident (e.g. release, fire);  
    (iv)   the name and quantity ofmaterial(s) involved to the extent known;
   (v)   the extent of injuries, if any; and  
    (vi)   the possible hazards to human health or the environment outside the facility.  
(4) The owner or operator shall enter in the operating record the time, date and details of any incident
that requires implementing the emergency procedures within fifteen days after the incident.  
(5) The owner or operator shall submit a written report on the incident to the Agency offices of the
incident.  
(6) The report shall include‐ 
(a)   the name, address and telephone number of the owner or the operator;  
(b)   the name, address and telephone number of the facility;  
(c)   the date, time and type of incident (e.g. fire, explosion);  
(d)   the name and quantity of materials involved;  
(e)   the extent of injuries, if any;  
(f)   an assessment of actual or potential hazards to human health or the environment, where  
this is applicable;  
(g)   estimated quantity and disposition of recovered materials that resulted from the incident;  
(h)   the cause of the incident; and  
(i)   the description of corrective action taken to prevent reoccurrence of the incident.  
PART 5
Record keeping in the facility
39. Operating record  
(1) A factory or industry or facility in which wastes are stored, operated, recycled or purified shall keep an up‐to‐
date written record at the premises of the factory, industry or facility.  
(2) The following particulars shall be kept by the owner or operator, that is‐  
(a)   a description of the quantity of each hazardous waste received and managed on‐site and the  
method and date of its treatment, or storage or disposal at the industry;  
(b)   a map or diagram of each cell or disposal area, showing the location of each hazardous waste  
within the industry. Every hazardous consignment shall be accompanied by a manifest;  
(c)   cross‐reference to specific manifest document numbers;  
(d)   records and results of waste analysis;  
(e)   summary reports and details of all incidents that require implementing the contingency plan;  
(f)   results of general inspections carried out by the Agency or on behalf of the Agency;  
(g)   analytical data of dangerous waste.  
40. Instructions on record keeping  
(1) In accordance with instructions by the Agency, the information in section 39 of these regulations shall be kept
in the operating record in the following manner, that is‐  
(a)   every hazardous consignment received shall be accompanied by a manifest;  
(b)   information required by these Regulations shall be kept for three years and shall not be   
destroyed without the written approval from the Agency;  
(c)   each hazardous waste received or managed shall be described by its common name and by  
its hazardous waste number.  
(2) Where a hazardous waste contains more than one hazardous waste number, the waste description
shall include all applicable hazardous waste numbers. If the hazardous waste number is not listed then the waste
description shall include the process which generated the waste.  
(3) The description required in paragraph (2) of this regulation shall include the waste's physical form
(whether liquid, solid, sludge, or gas).  
(4) The weight or volume and density of the hazardous waste shall be recorded, using one of the units of
measure specified in Schedule 10 to these Regulations.  
41. Power of the Agency to require for information about waste disposal, etc.  
(1) The Agency shall have power to call for relevant information pertaining to records and plans about
waste disposal by any industry at any given time.  
(2) While any enforcement action is pending the Agency shall have power to hold on to any record and no
limitation of time shall apply in respect thereof.  
(3) All records of waste disposal shall be submitted to the nearest Agency's office, including all particulars of the
site of the disposal and the area ofland covered by the disposal.  
PART 6
Ground water protection
42. Applicability of the Agency's regulations  
(1) All regulations made by the Agency for the control and protection of ground waste shall apply to industries and
factories that treat, store or dispose of the dangerous waste in surface impoundments, waste piles, land treatment
units or land fills.  
(2) The regulations shall also apply where waste migrate beyond the industry's waste management area unless the
industry or factory can prove to the satisfaction of the Agency that such waste originated from another source.  
(3) Factories or industries shall not be subject to any regulation to control or protect ground water if‐  
(a)   the factory or industry designs and operates a surface impoundment as a landfill;  
(b)   the Agency finds that the treatment zone of a land treatment unit does not contain levels of  
dangerous constituents that are above background levels of these constituents by an amount  
that is statistically significant.  
(4) An exemption under this regulation may only relieve an owner or operator of responsibility to meet
the requirements of this or any regulation during the closure care period, or the Agency finds that there is no
potential for migration of liquid from a regulated unit to the uppermost acquired during the active life of the
regulated unit (including the closure period) and the post‐closure care period:  
Provided that this demonstration shall be certified by a qualified geologist or geo‐technical
engineer.  
(5) Any regulation made to control or protect underground water shall apply during‐  
(a)   the active life of the regulated unit (including the closure period);  
(b)   the post‐closure period if the factory or industry is conducting a detection monitoring    
programme and during the compliance period;  
(c)   conducting a compliance monitoring programme; or  
(d)   a corrective action programme.  
(6) If, however, all the waste, waste residues, contaminated containment system components and contaminated
subsoils are removed or decontaminated at closure, the regulation controlling or protecting underground water
shall not apply.  
Required programme
43. Monitoring and response programme  
Factories and industries subject to these Regulations shall conduct monitoring and response programmes as
specified hereunder.  
44. Ground water protection standard  
(1) The factory or industry shall comply with conditions specified in the permit given by the Agency that
dangerous constituents entering the ground water from the regulated unit, do not exceed the concentration limits
in the uppermost aquifer underlying the waste management area during the compliance period.  
(2) Where it is not practicable for the Agency to establish a standard at the time a permit is issued or
when an already established permit is not protective enough, the Agency shall establish a ground water protection
standard when dangerous constituents have entered the ground water from a regulated unit.  
45. Dangerous constituents  
(1) The Agency shall specify in the facility permit the dangerous constituents to which the ground water
protection standard of regulation 4 of these Regulations shall apply.  
(2) For the purpose ofthis regulation, dangerous constituents shall be‐ 
(a) constituents identified in F AC000‐000‐9905 contained in Schedule 14 to these Regulations;  
(b)   constituents which have caused a waste to be regulated under these Regulations however     
detected.  
(3) The Agency may also specify in the permit indicator parameters as identified in the detection monitoring
programme that provide a reliable indication of the presence of dangerous constituents in the ground water.  
(4) The Agency shall not treat as dangerous a constituent which is not capable of posing a substantial and potential
hazard to human health or the environment.  
(5) In deciding to apply paragraph (4) ofthis regulation, the Agency shall consider whether or not the waste
constitutes a hazard to‐  
(a)   human health;
   (b)   the environment;  
(c)   ground water quality.  
46. Concentration limits  
(1) The Agency shall specify in the facility permit that concentration limits‐ 
(a)   shall not exceed the background level of that constituent in the ground water;  
(b)   for any of the constituents listed in Schedule 11 to these Regulations shall not exceed the  
background level of the constituent;  
(c)   shall not exceed an alternative limit established by the Agency.  
(2) The Agency may establish an alternative concentration limit for a dangerous constituent and in doing
so may consider the same factors listed in paragraph (1) of this regulation.  
47. Point of compliance  
(1) The Agency shall specify in the facility permit the point of compliance at which the ground water
protection standard of these Regulations shall apply and at which monitoring shall be conducted.  
(2) The point of compliance is a vertical surface located at the hydraulically down gradient limit of the
waste management area that extends down into the uppermost aquifer underlying the regulated units.  
(3) Alternatively, the point of compliance may be any closer point identified by the Agency at the time the
permit is issued, considering the following, that is‐  
(a)   risks of the facility;  
(b)   the wastes and constituents managed there;  
(c)   the potential for waste constituents to have already migrated past the alternate compliance  
point; and  
(d)   the potential threats to ground and surface water.  
(4) The waste management area is the limit projected in the horizontal plane of the area in which waste
may be placed during the active life of a regulated unit.  
(5) The waste management area shall include horizontal space taken up by any liner, dike or other barrier
designed to contain waste in a regulated unit.  
48. Compliance period  
(1) The facility permit granted by the Agency shall also state compliance period that is the number of
years of the active life of the waste management area.  
(2) The compliance period begins when the factory or industry initiates a compliance monitoring
programme thus satisfying the requirements of the Agency.  
(3) If the factory or industry is engaged in a corrective action programme at the end of the compliance
period, the period shall be extended until the factory or regulated industry can demonstrate that the ground water
protection standard of these Regulations has not been exceeded for a period ofthree consecutive years.  
49. General ground water monitoring requirements  
(1) The ground water monitoring system shall consist of a sufficient number of wells, installed at appropriate
locations and depth to yield ground water samples from the uppermost aquifer that is‐  
(a)   represents the quality of background water that had not been affected by leakage from a  
regulated unit; and  
(b)   represents the quality of ground water passing the point of compliance.  
(2) Industries with more than one regulated unit need not have separate ground water monitoring systems for
each unit provided that the system used for sampling the ground water in the upper‐water aquifer shall detect and
measure dangerous constituents entering the ground water in the uppermost from the regulated units.  
(3) All monitoring wells shall be cased in a manner allowing collection of representative ground water samples and
maintaining the integrity of the monitoring well bore‐hole.  
(4) Wells shall be constructed in such a manner as to prevent contamination of the samples, then sampled strata
and the layers between aquifers and water‐bearing strata.  
50. Detection monitoring programme  
(1) Any factory or industry required to establish a detection monitoring programme shall monitor the ground
water for indicator parameters (e.g. pH, specific conductance, total organic carbon (TOC), total organic halogen
(TOH), or heavy metals), waste constituents, or reaction products that provide a reliable indication of the presence
of dangerous constituents in ground water.  
(2) The Agency shall specify the parameters or constituents to be monitored in the permit issued to the facility.  
51. Compliance monitoring programme  
(1) An industry or factory required to establish a compliance monitoring programme shall‐  
(a)   monitor the ground water to determine whether regulated units are in compliance with the  
ground water protection standard under regulation 44 of these Regulations;  
(b)   install a ground water monitoring system at the compliance point as specified by the Agency;  
(c)   determine the concentration of dangerous constituents and parameters in ground water at  
each monitoring well at the compliance point at least quarterly during the compliance    
period:  
Provided that the owner or operator shall express the concentration at each monitoring well in a form necessary
for the determination of statistically significant increases;  
(d)   determine the rate and direction of ground water flow in the uppermost aquifer at least  
annually;  
(e)   analyse samples from all monitoring wells at the compliance point for constituents identified  
in FAC000‐000‐9905 contained in Schedule 14 to these Regulations and any other dangerous  
constituents not listed but which are specified in the permit issued to the facility at least  
annually to determine whether additional dangerous constituents are present in the    
uppermost aquifer if those constituents are young:  
Provided that all the findings shall be reported to the Agency within seven days after completion of the analysis;  
(f) use procedures and methods for sampling and analysis that meet the requirements of the  
Agency;  
(g)   determine whether there is an increase in the concentration limits for any dangerous    
constituents specified in the permit;  
(h)   notify the Agency in writing within seven days that the ground water protection standard is   
being exceeded at any monitoring well at the point of compliance;  
(i)   submit to the Agency an application for a permit modification to establish a corrective action  
programme within 90 days (or for regulated units managing EHW, within 60 days) if an    
engineering feasibility study has been previously submitted to the Agency;  
(j) demonstrate that a source, other than a regulated unit, caused the increase or that the    
increase resulted from error in sampling, analysis or evaluation, such demonstration being  
without prejudice to an application for permit modification;  
(k)   submit an application for a permit modification on determining that the compliance    
monitoring programme no longer satisfies the requirements ofthis regulation;  
(l)   assure the Agency that monitoring and corrective action measures necessary to achieve   
compliance with the ground water protection standard under regula‐tion 44 of these    
Regulations are taken during the term of the permit.  
52. Corrective action programme  
The owner or operator shall take corrective action to ensure that regulated units are in compliance with the
ground water protection standard under regulation 44 of these Regulations and this shall be specified in the
permit issued by the Agency to the facility.  
PART 7
Surface impoundments   
53. Surface impoundments to conform to standard  
(1) Owners or operators of surface impoundments shall ensure that a surface impoundment conforms
with standards and regulations which shall be prescribed by the Agency, from time to time.  
(2) A surface impoundment shall have a liner of such quality and strength as would prevent an escape of
waste into the adjacent sub‐surface soil or ground water at any time during the active life of the impoundment.  
(3) The intending owner of a surface impoundment shall apply to the Agency for necessary guidance.  
54. Design operating requirement  
(1) During the active life of a surface impoundment, the liner shall be‐  
(a)   designed, constructed and installed with materials to prevent any flow of wastes in and out  
of the impoundment during the active life of the facility;  
(b)   constructed with materials which can withstand physical contact with waste to which they  
are exposed, climatic conditions, the stress of installation and the stress of daily operation;  
(c)   placed upon a base capable of providing support to the liner and resistance to pressure    
above and below the liner;  
(d)   installed to cover all surrounding areas likely to be in contact with the waste or leachate; and  
(e)   for EHW management, the factory or industry shall submit an engineering report with its  
permit application affecting the basis for selecting the liners.  
(2) The report shall be certified by a licensed professional engineer approved by the Agency.  
(3) The factory or industry which own a new surface impoundment in which liquid EHW is managed shall‐  
(a)   install a double‐lined system which incorporates the specifications of regulation 55 of these
Regulations;  
(b) comply with the ground water monitoring requirements.  
(5) A surface impoundment shall‐ 
    (a)   be constructed and operated to prevent overfilling and take into account the effect of wind and      wave
action, rainfall run‐on malfunctions of level controllers, alarms and other equipment and   human error;  
(b)   be designed so that any flow of waste into the impoundment can be immediately shut off in  
the event of overtopping or liner failure;  
(c)   have at all times, functional dikes, where earthen, the dikes shall have a protective cover to
preserve their structural integrity.  
(6) The Agency shall specify in the permit to be obtained by the industry, designs and operating practices that are
necessary in the construction of surface impoundments and dikes.  
55. Double‐lined surface impoundment  
(1) Except as provided in regulation 54 of these Regulations, a factory or industry which owns a double‐lined
surface impoundment shall not be subject to the provisions of the said regulations if the following conditions are
met, that is‐  
(a)   the impoundment (including its underlying liners) shall be located entirely above the    
seasonal high‐water table;  
(b)   the impoundment shall be underlaid by two liners which are designed and constructed in a  
manner that prevents the migration of liquid into or out of the space between the liners:  
Provided that both liners shall meet all the specifications of sub‐paragraphs (a) and (b) of
paragraph (1) of this regulation;  
(c)   a leak detection system shall be constructed and operated between the liners to detect any  
migration of liquids into the space between the liners; and  
(d)   a leachate detection, collection and removal system be constructed and operated to remove
accumulated liquid from the system as quickly as possible to avoid unnecessary building of hydrostatic pressure in
the system.  
(2) If liquid leaks into the leak detection system, the factory or industry shall‐ 
(a) notify the Agency of the leak in writing within seven days after detecting the leak; and  
(b)   within a period of time specified in the permit, remove accumulated liquid, repair or replace the   liner
which is leaking and obtain a certification from a qualified engineer that the leak has been   stopped;
or  
(c)   begin to comply with any detection monitoring programmes specified in the permit.  
(3) The Agency shall specify in the permit all design and operating practices that are necessary to ensure that the
requirements of this regulations are satisfied.  
56. Monitoring and inspection during construction and installation    
(1) During construction and installation of liners and cover systems, that is‐  
(a)   membranes;  
(b)   sheets; or  
(c)   coatings,  
shall be inspected for uniformity, and imperfections, holes, cracks, thin spots, or foreign materials.  
(2) During maintenance‐  
(a)   synthetic lines and covers shall be inspected to ensure tight seams and joints for the absence  
of tears, punctures or blisters;  
(b)   soil‐based and admixed liners and covers shall be inspected for imperfections including lenses,
cracks, channels, root holes or other structural non‐uniformities that may cause an increase in the permeability of
the liner or cover.  
57. Inspection of surface impoundment  
(1) While a surface impoundment is in operation, it shall be inspected weekly and after storms to detect evidence
of any of the following‐  
(a)   deterioration, malfunctions, or improper operation of overtopping control system;  
(b)   sudden drops in the level of the impoundment's contents;  
(c)   the presence of liquids in leak detection system, where installed to comply with regulation  
55 (1) (c) of these Regulations;  
(d)   severe erosion or other signs of deterioration in the dikes or other containment devices.  
(2) Where an impoundment has not been in use for at least six months and a permit has not been issued, a
certification by a qualified engineer proving the structural integrity of the impoundment dike, shall be provided by
the factory or industry.  
(3) The certification shall establish, in particular, that the dike‐  
(a)   shall withstand the stress of the pressure exerted by the types and amounts of waste to be  
placed in the impoundment; and  
(b)   shall not fall due to scouring or piping, and remain without dependence of any liner system
included in the surface impoundment construction.  
58. Emergency repairs and contingency plans  
(1) A surface impoundment shall be removed from service in accordance with regulation 59 of  
these Regulations if‐  
(a)   unexpected changes of liquid levels occur;  
(b)   the dike leaks.  
(2) When a surface impoundment is to be removed from service as required by regulation 59 of  
these Regulations, the owner or operator shall‐  
(a)   immediately shut offthe flow or stop the addition of waste into the impoundment;  
(b)   immediately contain any surface leakage which has occurred or is occurring;  
(c)   immediately stop the leak;  
(d)   take any other necessary steps to stop or prevent catastrophic failure;  
(e)   empty the impoundment, if a leak cannot be stopped by any other means; and  
(f)   notify the Agency of the problem in writing within seven days after detecting the problems.  
(3) As part of the contingency plan in regulation 35 (1) of these Regulations and in this regulation,  
a factory or industry shall specify a procedure for complying with the requirements of this regulation and a
containment system evaluation and repair plan describing‐  
(a)   the testing and monitoring techniques;  
(b)   the procedures to be followed to evaluate the integrity of the containment system, in the  
event of a failure;  
(c)   a description of a schedule of actions to be taken in the event of possible failure;  
(d)   repair techniques, available materials to be used in the event of leakage due to containment
system failure or deterioration.  
59. Closure and post‐closure care  
(1) At closure, the factory or industry shall‐  
(a)   remove and decontaminate all waste and its residues, system components including liners,  
subsoils and structures and equipment which have all been contaminated with dangerous  
waste and leachate, and manage them as dangerous waste; or  
(b)   eliminate free liquids by removing wastes and waste residues;  
(c)   stabilise the remaining waste to a bearing capacity sufficient to support a final cover; and  
(d)   cover the surface impoundment with final cover designed and constructed to provide long‐ 
term minimisation of the flow of liquids through the closed impoundment;  
(e)   promote drainage and minimise erosion or abrasion of the final cover and accommodate  
settling and subsidence so that the cover's integrity is maintained.  
(2) If some waste residues or contaminated materials are left in place at final closure (except that no EHW may be
left in place) all factory and industries shall comply with all post‐closure requirements.  
(3) The owner or operator may‐  
(a)   maintain the integrity and effectiveness of the final cover, including making repairs to the  
cap as necessary to correct the effects of setting, subsidence, erosion or other events;  
        (b)     maintain and monitor the leak detection system in accordance with regulation 58 of these  
Regulations where such a system is present between double liner systems;  
(c)   maintain and monitor the ground water system;  
(d)   prevent run‐off from arising or otherwise damaging the final cover.  
(4) If a factory or industry plans to close a surface, impoundment in accordance with regulation 59 of these
Regulations and the impoundment does not comply with the liner requirements of regulation 54 of these
Regulations and is not exempted from those requirements in regulation 55 of these Regulation then‐  
(a)   the closure plan shall include both a plan for complying with regulation 59 of these    
Regulations and a contingent plan for complying with regulation 59 (2) in case not all    
contaminated subsoil can be practically removed at closure; and  
(b)   the owner or operator shall prepare a contingent post‐closure plan for complying with regulation
59 (2) of these Regulations in case not all contaminated subsoils can be practicably removed at the closure.  
(5) During the post‐closure care period, if liquids leak into a leak detection system installed under
regulation 55 (1) (c), the owner or operator shall notify the Agency of the leak in writing within seven days after
detecting the leak.  
(6) The Agency shall then modify the permit to require compliance with applicable requirements or if so
requested by the owner or operator, removal of all materials in accordance with regulation 59 of these
Regulations.  
60. Special requirement for ignitable or reactive waste  
Ignitable or reactive waste shall not be placed in a surface impoundment, unless the waste is treated or mixed
before or immediately after placement in the impoundment so that the resulting waste, mixture or dissolution of
material is no longer ignitable.  
61. Special requirements for dangerous wastes  
Incompatible wastes and materials shall not be placed in the same surface impoundments.  
62. Special wastes not to be placed in a surface impoundment  
(1) The wastes with code numbers FEF020, FEF021, FEF023, FEF026 or FEF027 shall not be placed in a surface
impoundment unless the factory or industry operates the surface impoundment in accordance with the
management plan for these wastes as approved by the Agency.  
(2) The factors to be considered are‐  
(a)   the volume, physical and chemical characteristics of the wastes, including their potential to  
    migrate through soil, their volatility or escape into the atmosphere;  
(b)   the attenuative properties of underlying and surrounding soils or other materials;  
(c)   the mobilising properties of other materials so disposed with these wastes; and  
(d)   the effectiveness of additional treatment, design or monitoring techniques.  
PART 8
Land treatment
63. Land treatment programme  
(1) Factories and industries that treat or dispose of dangerous waste in land treatment units shall
establish a land treatment programme designed to ensure that dangerous constituents placed in or on the
treatment zone are degraded, transformed or immobilised within the treatment zone specified by the Agency
when issuing the permit.  
(2) The Agency shall specify in the permit the dangerous constituents that shall be degraded, transformed
or immobilised as specified.  
(3) These dangerous constituents are those identified in FAC‐0000‐9905 and any other constituent which,
although not listed, is considered dangerous by the Agency.  
64. Treatment of dangerous waste in the treatment zone  
(1) Prior to the application of the waste to be treated in the treatment zone, the factory or industry shall
demonstrate using field tests, laboratory analysis, available data or, in the case of existing units, operating data, to
show that dangerous constituents in the waste can be completely treated in the treatment zone.  
(2) For the treatment of waste within the treatment zone a land treatment demonstration permit is
required.  
65. Design, construction, etc., of factory or industry to minimise dangerous constituent  
The factory or industry shall design, construct, operate and maintain‐  
(a)   the unit in accordance with all design and operating conditions that were used in the    
treatment demonstration under regulation 64 of these Regulations;  
(b)   minimise the sum of dangerous constituents during the active life of the land treatment unit;  
(c)   a run‐on control system capable of preventing flow unto the treatment zone during    
discharge from at least a twenty‐ five years storm;  
(d)   a run‐off management system to collect and control at least the water volume resulting from  
a twenty‐five years storm;  
(e)   a run‐off management system to collect at least the water volume resulting from a twenty‐ 
five year storm.  
66. Field test and laboratory analysis  
(1) Any field test or laboratory analysis conducted in order to make the demonstration under regulation 65 of
these Regulations shall‐  
(a)   accurately simulate the characteristics and operating conditions for the proposed land  
                    treatment unit including‐  
(i) the characteristics of the waste and of the dangerous constituent present;
(ii) the topogragraphy of the surrounding area;  
(iii)   the characteristics and depth of soil in the treatment zone; and (v) the operating practices to  
be used at the unit;  
(b)   be conducted in a manner that protects human health and the environment.  
67. Design and operating requirement  
(1) The Agency shall specify in the permit issued for the facility how the factory or industry shall design,
construct, operate and maintain the land treatment unit in compliance with these Regulations.  
(2) Collection and holding facilities (e.g. tanks or basins) associated with run‐on and run‐off control system
after storm shall be emptied or otherwise managed expeditiously in accordance with the provisions of these
Regulations.  
(3) If the treatment zone contains particulate matter which may be subject to wind dispersal, the owner
or operator shall control the wind dispersal.  
(4) The owner or operator shall inspect the unit weekly and after storms to detect evidence of‐  
(a)   deterioration, malfunctions, or improper operation of run‐on and run‐off control system; and  
(b)   improper functioning of wind dispersal control measures.  
68. Food chain crops  
(1) The Agency may allow the growth of food chain crops in, or on the treatment zone only if the factory
or industry satisfied the conditions of these Regulations.  
(2) The Agency may specify in the permit issued for the facility the specific food chain crops which may be
grown on the treatment zone.  
(3) The factory or industry shall demonstrate that there is no substantial risk to human health caused by
the growth of such crops in or on the treatment zone by demonstrating prior to the planting of such crops, that
dangerous constituents other than cadmium‐  
(a)   shall not be transferred to the plant by intake or direct contact and shall not otherwise be  
ingested by food chain animals grazing within the treatment zone; or  
(b)   shall not occur in greater concentrations on crops grown on the treatment zone than when  
the same crops are grown on untreated soils under similar conditions and in the same    
region.  
69. Demonstration by the use offield and test greenhouse studies  
(1) In making such a demonstration, the factory or industry may use field tests, greenhouse studies, available data
and in the case of existing units, operating data, and shall‐  
(a)   base the demonstration on conditions similar to those present in the treatment zone,    
including soil characteristics (for example pH, cation‐exchange capacity) specific wastes,   
application rates or methods, and crops to be grown; and  
(b)   describe the procedures used in conducting such tests, including the sample selection    
criteria, sample size, analytical methods, and statistical procedures.  
(2) If the owner or operator intends to conduct field tests or greenhouse studies in order to make the
demonstration, he shall obtain a permit from the Agency for conducting such activities.  
70. Unsaturated zone monitoring  
(1) Subject to this regulation, an industry or factory shall establish an unsaturated zone monitoring
programme to monitor the soil and soil‐pore liquid to determine whether dangerous constituents migrate out of
the treatment zone.  
(2) The Agency shall specify the dangerous constituents as specified in regulation 63 (2) of these
Regulations to be monitored in the facility permit.  
(3) The Agency may require monitoring for principal dangerous constituents (PDCS) in lieu of those
constituent specified under regulation 63 (2) of these Regulations.  
(4) An unsaturated zone monitoring system mentioned in paragraph (1) of this regulation which includes
soil monitoring, soil cores and soil‐pore liquid monitoring using devices such as lysimeters and shall consist of a
sufficient number of sampling points at appropriate locations and depths yield samples that represent the quality
of background soil‐pore, liquid quality and the chemical make‐up of the soil that has not been affected by leakage
from and below the treatment zone.  
(5) The factory or industry shall establish a background value for each dangerous constituent to be
monitored.  
(6) The Agency shall specify the frequency and timing of soil and soil‐pore liquid monitoring in the permit
issued to the facility after considering the frequency, timing and rate of waste application, and the soil
permeability.  
(7) The owner or operator shall use consistent sampling and analysis procedures that are designed to
ensure sampling results that provide a reliable indication of soil‐pore, liquid quality and the chemical make‐up of
the soil below the treatment zone.  
(8) In addition to regulation 70 (2) of these Regulations, the factory or industry shall implement procedures and
techniques for‐  
(a)   sample collection;  
(b)   sample preservation and shipment;  
(c)   analytical procedures; and  
(d)   control of custody and distribution of sample.  
(9) The factory or industry shall conduct soil monitoring from time to time to determine whether there is
a statistically significant change over background values for any dangerous constituents to be monitored under
regulation 70 (2) of these Regulations.  
(10) If the owner or operator determines, pursuant to regulation 70 (6) of these Regulations, that there is
a statistically significant increase of dangerous constituents below the treatment zone, he shall‐  
(a)   notify the Agency of this finding in writing within seven days and the notification shall    
indicate what constituents have shown statistically significant increases;  
(b)   within 45 days, submit to the Agency an application for a permit modification to amend the  
operating practices at the facility in order to maximise the success of degradation,    
transformation, or immobilisation processes in the treatment zone;  
(c)   continue to monitor in accordance with the unsaturated zone monitoring programme    
established under this regulation;  
(d)   demonstrate that a source other than regulated units caused the increase or that the    
increase resulted from an error in sampling, analysis, or evaluation.  
(11) In addition to making a demonstration under this regulation, a factory or industry shall within 45 days
submit concurrently a permit modification application, unless such demonstration successfully shows the increase
resulted from an error in sampling, analysis, evaluation or from a source other than regulated units.  
71. Record keeping  
The owner or operator shall include dangerous waste application dates and rates in the operating record.  
72. Closure and post‐closure  
(1) During the closure period, the owner or operator shall‐  
(a)   continue all operations (including pH control) necessary to maximise degradation,    
transformation or immobilisation of dangerous constituents within the treatment zone as  
required under regulations 63, 64, 65 of these Regulations, except to the extent that such  
measures are inconsistent with these Regulations;  
(b)   continue unsaturated zone monitoring except that in soil‐pore liquid, monitoring may be  
terminated ninety days after the last application of waste to zone; and  
(c)   establish a vegetative cover on the portion of the facility being closed at such time that the  
cover will not substantially impede degradation, transformation or immobilisation of    
dangerous constituents in the treatment zone and the vegetative cover shall be capable of  
maintaining growth without extensive maintenance.  
(2) When closure is completed, the owner or operator shall submit to the Agency a certification by an independent
qualified soil scientist or a licensed professional engineer, that the facility has been closed in accordance with the
specifications in the approved closure plan.  
73. Special requirement for ignitable or reactive waste  
The owner or operator of a facility, factory, or industry shall not apply ignitable or reactive waste to the treatment
zone unless the waste is immediately incorporated into the soil so that the resulting material is no longer ignitable
or reactive waste.  
74. Special requirement for incompatible waste  
The owner or operator of a facility, factory or industry shall not place incompatible wastes or incompatible
materials, in the same treatment zone, unless‐  
(a)   the waste is immediately incorporated into the soil so that the resulting waste, mixture or  
dissolution of material no longer meets the definition of ignitable and reactive wastes;  
(b)   the waste is managed in such a way that it is protected from any material or conditions    
which may cause it to ignite or react.  
75. Special requirement for extremely hazardous waste  
(1) Under no circumstances will extremely Hazardous Waste (EHW) be allowed to remain in closed land treatment
unit after concluding the postclosure care period unless‐  
(a)   the Agency extends the postclosure care period; or  
(b)   the Agency requires that all EHW be disposed off‐site or that it be treated in around or safe  
environment manner.  
(2) In deciding whether to extends postclosure care which required disposal or treatment of extremely hazardous
waste the Agency may take into account the likelihood that the waste will or will not continue to degrade the land
treatment zone to the extend that it is still regarded as of extremely hazardous waste (EHW).  
(3) For the purposes of this regulations, EHW shall be considered to remain in a land treatment zone if
representative samples of the treatment zone are designated as EHW by procedures for representative sampling
and testing specified in the permit.  
76. Special requirements for dangerous wastes  
(1) Dangerous wastes with Code Nos. FEF020, FEF02l, FEF022, FEF023, FEF026 or FEF027 contained in Schedule 12
and these mentioned in Schedule 13 of these Regulations shall not be placed in a land treatment zone unless the
owner or operator operates the treatment zone in accordance with a management plan.  
(2) The factor to be considered are as specified in section 62 of these Regulations.  
PART 9
Waste Piles
77. Applicability  
(1) The provisions of this Part shall apply in this section to owners and operator of facilities that store or
treat dangerous waste piles but not to factories or industries that are located near or very close to the facilities
containing the waste piles provided that such waste piles are subject to the provisions of Part VII of these
Regulations.  
(2) Any factory or industry whose waste pile is inside or under a structure that provides protection from
precipitation so that neither run‐off not leachate is generated, is not subject to the provisions of section 62 of
these Regulations provided that‐  
(a)   liquid or materials containing free liquids are not placed in the pile;  
(b)   the pile is protected from surface water run‐on by the structure or in some other manner;  
(c)   the pile is designed and operated to control dispersal of the waste by wind, by means other  
than wetting; and  
(d)   the pile shall not generate leachate through decomposition or any other reactions.  
(3) All EHW and respiratory carcinogens stored in waste piles shall be protected from dispersal by precipitation or
wind (covered, stored inside a building, etc.).  
78. Design and operating requirements  
(1) A waste pile shall have‐  
(a)   a liner that is designed, constructed, installed and maintained to prevent any migration of  
wastes out of the pile into the adjacent subsurface soil or ground water or surface water at  
any time during the active life (including the closure period) of the waste pile;  
(b)   the liner may be constructed of materials that may allow waste to migrate into the liner itself  
(but not into the adjacent subsurface soil or ground water or surface water) during the active  
life of the facility:  
Provided the liner shall be as specified in regulation 54 of these Regulations;  
(c)   the leachate collection and removal system which conform with the Agency's specifications  
in regulation 55 (d) to collect and remove leachate from the pile.  
(2) For extremely hazardous waste management, the owner or operator of the factory or industry shall
submit an engineering report certified by a licensed professional engineer with his permit application stating the
basis for the liner required in regulation 62.  
(3) If the Agency finds, based on a demonstration by the factory or industry, that, alternate design and
operating practices, together with location characteristics, shall prevent the migration of any dangerous
constituents into the ground water or surface water at any future time the factory or industry may be exempted
from the requirements of regulation 66 of these Regulations.  
(4) The owner or operator shall design, construct, operate and maintain a run‐on control system and a
run‐off management system to conform with regulation 65 (iii) and (iv) of these Regulations.  
79. Double‐lined piles  
(1) The factory or industry of a double‐lined waste pile is not subject to the provisions ofthis Part ifthe
conditions specified in regulation 55 (a) (i) for impoundment are satisfied.  
(2) If liquid seeps into the leak detection system the owner or operator shall comply with the provisions of
regulation 58 of these Regulations.  
(3) The Agency shall specify in the permit all design and operating practices that are necessary to ensure
that the provisions of this Part are complied with.  
80. Inspection of lines  
(1) The owner or operator of a pile shall be subject to the following guidelines‐  
(a)   the pile (including its underlying liner) shall be located entirely above the seasonal high‐   
water table;  
(b)   the pile shall be underlain by a base that meets all the specification of regulation 55 (1) (a) of  
these Regulations;  
(c)   the wastes in the pile shall be removed periodically and the liner shall be inspected for    
deterioration, cracks or other conditions that may result in leaks;  
(d)   the frequency of inspection plans shall be based on the potential for the liner (base) to crack  
or otherwise deteriorate under the conditions of operation;  
(e)   the liner shall be of sufficient strength and thickness to prevent failure due to puncture, cracking,
tearing, or other physical deterioration from equipment used to place waste in the pile or to clean and expose the
liner surface for inspection.  
(2) If deterioration, cracking or other condition is identified that is causing or could cause a leak, the
owner or operator of the factory shall‐  
(a)   notify the Agency in writing within seven days after detecting the condition; and  
(b)   repair or replace the liner (base) and obtain a certification from a qualified engineer that the  
liner (base) has been repaired and leakage shall not occur; or  
(c)   comply with a detection monitoring programme as defined in the permit.  
81. Monitoring and inspection  
During construction or installation, liners and cover systems shall be inspected for uniformity, damage and
imperfections as specified in regulation 56 (a) (b) of these Regu‐lations for surface impoundments.   
82. Containment system and repairs contingency plans  
(1) Whenever there is any indication of a possible failure of the containment system, such as‐ 
(a)   liquid detected in the leachate detection system;  
(b) evidence of leakage or the potential for leakage in the base;  
(c) erosion of the base; or  
(d) apparent or potential deterioration of the liner(s) based on observation or samples of the liner
materials,  
then that system shall be inspected in accordance with the provisions of the containment system evaluation and
repair plan required by regulation 58 of these Regulation.  
(2) Whenever there is a positive indication of a failure of the containment system, the waste pile shall be
removed from service.  
(3) Such failure as maintained in subparagraph (1) of this regulation may include detection in the leachate
detection system or breach such as hole, tear, crack, or separation in the base.  
(4) If the waste pile is to be removed from service as required by the factory or industry, the  
owner or operator of the factory shall immediately‐  
(a)   stop adding waste to the pile;  
(b)   contain any leakage which has occurred or is occurring;  
(c)   cause the leakage to be stopped; and  
(d)   remove the waste from the leak if it cannot be stopped by any other means.  
(5) As part of the contingency plan the owner or operator shall specify‐  
(a)   a procedure for complying with the provisions of regulation 58 of these Regulations; and  
(b)   a containment system evaluation and repair plan describing‐  
         (i)   testing and monitoring techniques;  
    (ii)   procedures to be followed to evaluate the integrity of the containment system in  
    the event of a possible failure;  
            (iii)   a schedule of actions to be taken in the event of a possible failure; and  
                          (iv)   a description of the repair techniques and materials (and their availability) to be  
    used in the event of leakage due to containment system failure or deterioration    
which does require the waste pile to be removed from service;  
(c)   for extremely hazardous waste piles, the factory or industry shall submit with his permit  
application a statement signed by a licensed professional engineer stating the basis on which  
the evaluation and repair plan was established.  
(5) No waste pile that has been removed from service pursuant to regulation 58 of these Regulations may
be restored to service unless the containment system has been‐  
(a)   repaired;  
(b)   certified by a qualified engineer as meeting the design specification approved in the permit.  
(6) A waste pile which has been removed from service pursuant to regulation 58 of these Regulations and cannot
be repaired, shall be closed in accordance with regulation 59 of these Regulations.  
83. Special requirements for incompatible waste  
(1) Piles of incompatible wastes shall not be served by the same system and shall be separated or
protected by means of a dike, bam, well or other device.  
(2) Dangerous wastes shall not be piled on the same base where incompatible wastes or materials were
previously piled, unless the base has been decontaminated sufficiently.  
84. Closure and post‐closure care  
At closure, the factory or industry shall comply with the requirement specified in regulation 72 of these
Regulations.  
85. Special requirements for dangerous wastes  
(1) Dangerous waste with code No.'s FEF020, FEF02l, FEF022, FEF023, FEF026 and FEF027 shall not be placed in
waste piles that are not enclosed as defined in regulation 76 of these Regulations unless the factory or industry
operates the waste pile in accordance with a management plan approved by the Agency in accordance with the
provisions of regulation 65 of these Regulations.  
(2) The factories to be considered are specified in regulation 62 of these Regulations.  
PART 10
Landfills
86. Applicability of the provisions of Chapter  
The provisions in this Chapter shall apply to owners and operators of facilities that dispose of dangerous waste in
landfills.  
87. Design and operating requirements  
(1) A landfill shall have the requirements specified in regulations 54 of these Regulations.  
(2) The design, construction, maintenance and operation of a leachate collection and removal system shall
conform to specifications in regulations 54 and 55 (1) (c) of these Regulations.  
(2) Any owner or operator of a landfill covered by sub‐paragraph (1) of this regulation shall be exempted
from the provisions of regulation 55 (1) (a)‐(d) of these Regulations.  
(3) The owner or operator of landfill covered by sub‐paragraph (1) of this regulation shall design,
construct, operate, and maintain a run‐out control system of the landfill during peak discharge from at least a
twenty years storm, and a run‐off.  
89. Double‐lined landfills  
The factory or industry of a double‐lined landfill is not subject to the provisions of this Chapter if the provisions of
regulation 59 of these Regulations have been complied with.  
90. Monitoring and inspection  
During construction or installation, liners and cover systems shall be inspected for uniformity, damage and
imperfections as specified in regulation 56 of these Regulations.  
91. Surveying and record‐keeping  
The factory or industry of a landfill shall maintain the items in the operating record, that is‐  
(a)   on a map, the exact location and dimensions, including depth of each cell with respect to  
permanently surveyed benchmarks; and  
(b)   the contents of each cell and the approximate location of each dangerous waste type within  
each cell.  
92. Closure and post‐closure care  
(1) At final closure of the landfill or upon closure of any cell, the factory or industry shall‐  
(a)   comply with the specifications contained in regulation 59 of these Regulations covering  
    surface impoundments;  
(b)   provide long‐term minimisation of migration of liquids, through the closed landfill;  
(c)   function with minimum maintenance;  
(d)   promote drainage and minimise exertion or abrasion of the cover;  
(e)   accommodate setting and subsidence so that the cover's integrity is maintained; and  
(f) have a permeability less than or equal to that of any bottom liner system or natural subsoils  
present.  
(2) After final closure, the owner or operator shall comply with all post‐closure provisions in regulations 59 of these
Regulations.  
(3) In addition, the owner or operator shall continue to‐  
(a)   operate the leach collection and removal system until leachate is no longer detected;  
(b)   protect and maintain surveyed benchmarks used in accordance with the provisions of section  
55 (2) of these Regulations.  
(4) During the post ‐closure care period, if liquid leaks into a leak detection system, the owner or operator
shall notify the Agency.  
93. Special requirements for incompatible waste  
Incompatible wastes, or incomparable wastes and materials shall be treated in accordance with regulations 74 and
83 of these Regulations.  
PART 11
Incinerators
94. (1) The provisions ofthis Part shall apply to factories and industries that incinerate solid and dangerous waste in
boilers or industrial furnaces in order to destroy them‐  
(a)   after an examination of the waste analysis included with Part B of the factory or industries  
permit application.  
(2) The agency may exempt the facility from the provisions of this Part, if the waste is to be burned in an
incinerator of a factory or industry, Part B of the application for a permit bas been examined by the Agency and the
waste has been carefully analysed as not detrimental to human health and the environment after burning.  
(3) Throughout normal operation the operator shall conduct sufficient waste analysis to verify that waste feed to
the incinerator is within the physical and chemical composition limits specified in his permit.  
96. Designation of principal organic dangerous constituents and dangerous combustion by products  
(1) Organic constituents or by‐products which present the greatest degree of difficulty of incineration
shall be designated principal organic dangerous constituents (PODC's) and dangerous combustion by‐products
(DCBP's) and shall be treated to the required standards specified in regulation 64 of these Regulations.  
(2) The Agency shall consider constituents as dangerous if they are present in large quantities or
concentrations.  
(3) For each waste feed to be burned, one or more PODC's and dangerous combustion by‐products shall
be specified in the facility's permit from among those constituents listed in FAC 000‐000‐9905 and where possible
to the practicable, from among those constituents which contribute to the toxicity, persistence or carcinogeniaty
of wastes designated under regulations 11, 12, and 13 of these Regulations.  
(4) This specification shall be based on the degree of difficulty of incineration of the organic constituents
of waste feed and its combustion by‐products and their concentration or mass, considering the results of waste
analysis and trial s.  
97. Performance standards  
(1) An incinerator burning dangerous waste, shall he designed, constructed and maintained so that when
operated in accordance with operating requirements specified under regulation 99 of these Regulations, it shall
meet certain performance standards specified by the Agency.  
(2) Except as provided in paragraph (3) of this regulation an incinerator burning dangerous waste shall achieve
destruction and removal efficiency (DRE) of 99.99 per cent for each PODC designated in its permit for each waste
feed. DRE is determined for each PODC from the following equation, that is‐  
                     (a) DRE  = Win W out *100%                                                                                                                                                               
      ‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐                                                                                                                                     
     W in  
     where W in ‐ Mass feed rate of one PODC in the waste stream feeding the incinerator, and W  
out ‐ Mass emission rate to the same PODC present in exhaust emisson prior to release to  
the atmosphere.  
(b)   An incinerator burning dangerous waste FEF020, FEF02l, FEF022, FEF026 or FEF027    
contained in Schedule 13 of these Regulations shall achieve DRE 99.999 per cent for each  
PODC's designated in its permit. This performance must be demonstrated on PODC's that are  
more difficult to incinerate than tetrapentadioxins and hexachlorodibenz‐ P‐dioxin and  
dibenzofurans.  
(c)   DRE is determined for each PODC's from the equation in subsection (a) above. In addition,  
the owner or operator of the incinerator shall notify, the Agency of his intent to incinerate  
dangerous wastes FEF020, FEF022, FEF023, FEF026 or FEF027.  
(d)   Incinerators burning dangerous waste shall destroy dangerous combustion by products    
designated under section 96 that the total mass emission rate of these by‐products emitted  
from the stack, is no more than 10 per cent of the total mass feed rate of PODG's fed into the  
incinerator.  
(e)   (i) An incinerator burning dangerous waste and producing stack emissions of more than  
    1.8 kilograms per hour of hydrogen chloride (HCL) emissions such that the rate of emission is  
no greater than the larger of either 1.8 kilograms per hour or one percent of the HCL in stack  
gas prior to entering any pollution control equipment.  
    (ii)   An incinerator burning dangerous waste shall not emit particulate matter in excess  
    of 180 milligrams per dry standard cubic meter when corrected for the amount of    
oxygen in the stock gas according to the formula‐  
          Pc Pmx14                                                                                                                                       
      ‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐                                                                                                          
            21‐ Y  
Where Pc is the corrected concentration of particulate matter, Pm is the measured concentration of
particulate matter and Y is the measured concentration of oxygen in the stack gas, using the Orsat method for
oxygen analysis of dry flue gas. This correction procedure is to be used by all dangerous waste incinerators except
those operating under conditions of oxygen environment. For these facilities the Agency will select an appropriate
correction procedure to be specified in the facility permit.  
(f) The emission standards specified in sub‐paragraph (e) above shall be met when no other more
stringent standards exist. Where a state or local air pollution control authority has jurisdiction and has more
stringent emission standards, an incinerator burning dangerous wastes shall comply with the applicable air
pollution control authority's emission standards (including limits based on best available control technology).  
(g)   For the purpose of permit enforcement, compliance with the operating requirements specified in
the permit under regulation 99 of these Regulations shall be regarded as compliance with regulation 97 of these
Regulations, however evidence that compliance with those permit conditions is insufficient to ensure compliance
with the performance requirements of regulation 99 of these Regulations, it may be evidence justifying
modification, revocation, or re‐issuance of a permit.  
98. Trial burns and permit modifications  
(1) The owner or operator of a dangerous waste incinerator shall  only wastes specified in his permit and
only under operating conditions specified for those wastes under regulation 99 of these Regulations except‐  
(a)   in approved trial s; or  
(b)   under exemptions created under regulation 97 (b) of these Regulations.  
(2) New dangerous wastes may be burned only after operating conditions have been specified in a trial
burn permit or a permit modification has been issued as applicable. Operating requirements for new wastes shall
be based on trial burn results or included with a permit application.  
(3) The permit for a new dangerous waste incinerator shall establish appropriate conditions for each of
the applicable requirements of this paragraph, including but not limited to allowable feeds and operating
conditions necessary to meet the requirements of section 99 but sufficient to comply with the following standards‐  
(a)   the period beginning with initial introduction of dangerous waste to the incinerator and   
ending with initiation of the trial burn, shall exceed 1020 hours operating time for treatment  
of dangerous waste;  
(b)   during the trial , the operating requirements shall be sufficient to demonstrate compliance  
with the performance standards of section 99 and shall be in accordance with the approved  
trial burn plan;  
(c)   immediately after following completion of the trial , and for the minimum period sufficient to  
allow sample analysis, data computation, and submission of the trial  results by the applicant,  
and review of the trial  results and modification of the facility permit.  
99. Operating requirements  
(1) An incinerator shall be operated in accordance with operating requirements specified in the permit. These will
be specified on a case‐by‐case basis as those demonstrated in a trial burn.
(2) Each set of operating requirements shall specify the composition of waste feed, and acceptable operating limits
including the following conditions‐  
(a)   carbon monoxide (CO) level in the stack exhaust gas;  
(b)   waste feed rate;  
(c)   combustion temperature;  
(d)   an appropriate indicator of combustion gas velocity;  
(e)   allowance variations in incinerator system designed or operating procedures; and  
(f) such other operating requirements as are necessary to ensure that the performance    
standards of regulation 97 of these Regulations are met.  
(3) During start‐up and shut‐down of an incinerator, dangerous waste (except waste exempted in accordance with
subsection 97 (b)) shall not be fed into the incinerator and shall not operate within the conditions of operation
(temperature, air feed rate, etc.) specified in the permit.  
(4) Fugitive emissions from the combustion zone shall be controlled by‐ 
(a)   keeping the combustion zone totally sealed;  
(b)   maintaining a combustion zone pressure lower than atmospheric pressure; or
   (c)   providing an alternate means for fugitive emissions control, equivalent to maintenance of  
combustion zone pressure lower than atmospheric pressure.  
   (5) An incinerator shall be operated with a functioning system to automatically cut off waste feed to the
incinerator when operating conditions deviate from limits established under this section.  
(6) An incinerator shall cease operation if waste feed, incinerator design, or operating conditions exceed
limits designated in its permit.  
100. Monitoring and inspection  
(1) The factory or industry shall conduct, and closely monitor the following while incinerating dangerous waste‐  
(a)   combustion temperature, waste feed rate, and the indicator of combustion gas velocity   
specified in the facility permit on a continuous basis;  
(b)   carbon monoxide (CO) on a continuous basis at a point in the incinerator down‐stream of the  
combustion zone and prior to release to the atmosphere; and  
(c)   as required by the Agency, sampling and analysis of the waste and exhaust emissions to   
verify that the operating requirements established in the permit achieve the performance  
standard of section 97.  
(2) The incinerator and associated equipment (pumps, valves, conveyors, pipes, etc.) shall be completely
inspected at least daily for leaks, spills, fugitive emissions and signs of tampering.  
(3) All emergency waste feed cut‐off controls and system alarms must be tested at least weekly to verify
proper operation, unless the owner or operator demonstrates to the Agency that weekly inspections will unduly
restrict orupset operations and that less frequent inspections will be adequate.  
(4) Emergency cut‐off and alarm systems shall be tested at least monthly.  
(5) Monitoring and inspection data shall be recorded and the records shall be placed in the operating log.  
101. Closure  
(1) At closure the factory or industry operator shall remove all dangerous waste and dangerous waste
residues (including but not limited to ash scrubber liquids, and from scrubber site).  
(2) The remaining equipment, basis, liners, soil and debris containing, or contaminated with dangerous
waste or waste residues shall be decontaminated or removed, and disposed in an environmentally safe manner.  
PART 12
Harmful/dangerous/hazardous/toxic wastes
Tracking programme
102. The tracking programme  
(1) The tracking programme shall‐  
(a)   provide for tracking of the collection, transportation and treatment of the wastes from its  
generation to the disposal;  
(b)   include a system for providing the generator of the waste with assurance that the waste is  
received by the disposal facility;  
(c)   use a uniform format for tracking;  
(d)   include the following requirements‐  
    (i)   segregation and/or recovery of the waste at the point of generation, where    
    practicable;  
    (ii)   placement of the waste in containers that will protect waste handlers and the public  
    from exposures;  
    (iii)   appropriate labelling of containers of the wastes.  
(2) The waste that is incinerated need not be tracked after incineration except for the disposal of the ash.  
103. Medical waste and laboratory waste tracking programme  
The following types of harmfulldangerous/hazardous/medical wastes to be tracked include, but are not limited to
the following types of solid waste‐  
(a)   cultures and stock of infectious agents and associated biological materials, including cultures  
from medical and pathological laboratories, cultures; and  
(b)   stock of infectious agents, from research and industrial laboratories, wastes from the  
production of biological, discarded live and attenuated vaccines, and culture dishes and   
devices used to transfer, inoculate and mix cultures;  
(c)   pathological wastes; including tissues, organs and body parts that are removed during    
surgery and autopsy;  
(d)   wastes of afterbirth (placenta), human blood and products of blood including serum, plasma  
and other blood components;  
(e)   sharp instruments that have been used in patient care or in medical research or industries,  
including hypodermic needles, syringes, pasteur pipettes, broken glass, and scalpel blades;  
(f) contaminated animal carcasses, body parts, and cages used for animals that were exposed to  
infectious agents during research, production of biological or testing of pharmaceutical;  
(g)   wastes from surgery or autopsy that were in contact with infectious agents, including soiled  
dressings, sponges, drapes, lavage‐tubes, drainage sets, under‐pads, and surgical gloves;  
(h)   laboratory wastes from medical, pathological, or industrial laboratories that were in contact  
with infectious agents, including slides and cover slips, disposable gloves, laboratory coats  
and aprons;  
(i)   dialysis wastes that were in contact with the blood of patients undergoing haemodialysis,  
including contaminated disposable equipment and supplies such as tubing, filters, disposable  
sheets, towels, gloves, aprons and laboratory coats;  
(j) discarded medical equipment and parts that were in contact with infectious agents;  
(k)   biological wastes and discarded materials contaminated with blood, faecal matter, exudate  
or secretion from human beings or animals who are isolated to protect others from    
communicable diseases;  
(l)   such other waste materials that result from the administration of medical care to a patient  
by a health care provider and is found by the Agency to pose a threat to human health or the  
environment; and  
(m)   radioactive medical wastes.  
104. Inspection  
Any person who generates, stores, treats, transports, disposes of, or otherwise handles or has handled medical,
hazardous, toxic or harmful wastes shall upon request of any officer, employee or representative duly designated
by the Agency furnish information relating to such wastes, including any tracking forms required to be maintained
according to the provision of these guidelines, conduct monitoring or testing, and permit such persons at all
reasonable times to have access to, and copy all records relating to waste. For such purpose, such persons are
authorised to‐  
(a)   enter at reasonable times, any establishment, or other place, where medical or    
harmful/dangerous hazardous wastes have been generated, stored, treated or transported  
from;  
(b)   conduct monitoring or testing; and  
(c)   inspect and obtain samples from any bonafide staff or representative of the establishment of any
such wastes and samples of any container or labelling for such wastes.  
105. Procedure  
(1) Each inspection under this section shall be commenced and completed within a reasonable period as
determined by the Agency.  
106. Inspection  
(1) If the official from the Agency obtains any sample prior to leaving the premises, he shall give to the owner,
operator, or agent in charge a receipt describing the sample obtained and if requested, a portion of each sample in
volume or weight to the portion retained, (if giving such an equal portion is feasible).  
(2) If analysis is made of such samples, a copy of the result of such analysis shall be furnished promptly to
the owner of the factory or industry in charge of the premises concerned.  
(3) The mechanism for implementation and enforcement shall be co‐ordinated by the Agency in
collaboration with relevant federal and state ministries and parastatals.  
107. Enforcement  
The procedure for compliance with this order and violations shall be as contained in the provisions of Decree 42 of
1988 and Decree 58 of 1988 in addition to any other laws for the time being in force including appropriate
penalties.  
108. Penalty  
A person who contravenes a provision of these Regulations is guilty of an offence and liable on conviction to the
penalty specified in section 35 or 36 of the Federal Environmental Protection Agency Act.  
109. Interpretation  
In these Regulations, unless the context otherwise requires‐  
"Agency" means the Federal Environmental Protection Agency established by the Federal Environmental
Protection Agency Act;  
"person" includes a corporate and incorporate body, industry, enterprises operator, owner of a facility in which
waste or hazardous substances, are handled;  
"waste or hazardous waste" has the meaning assigned thereto by the Federal Environmental Protection Agency
Act.  
200. Citation  
These Regulations may be cited as the National Environmental Protection (Management of Solid and Hazardous
Wastes) Regulations.  
___________________________
SCHEDULE 1
[Regulation.]
TABE 1.1
Toxicity Category Table
Category    TLM 96 (Fish)     Oral (Rat) LD 50    Inhalation (Rat) LC 50   Dermal (Rabbit)                                          
    (Fish) or LC                                        (mg/kg)                          LC50 (mg/kg)                      LD50   (mg/kg)                                                                 
    50 mg/‐ 
X …………….  <0.01       <0.5    <0.02     <2    
A……………… 0.1‐1       0.5‐5    0.02‐0.2     2‐20   
B……………… 1‐10       5‐5    0.2‐2     20‐200   
C………………. 10‐100    50‐500       2‐20     200‐2000   
D……………… 100‐1000    500‐5000       20‐200     2,000‐20,000   
(a) In this table the degree of toxicity decreases from X to D with X being the most acutely toxic category.  
(b) Any person or factory generating waste containing one or more toxic categories shall determine the equivalent
concentration for the waste on the basis of the following formular that is‐  
Equivalent concentration (%)  
A%   B%   C%   D%                                                                                                                                                    
= X% +    ‐‐‐‐‐   ‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐  ‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐  ‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐                                                                                                                      
10   100   1,000   10,000  
Where (X, A, B, C, or D)% is the sum of all the concentration percentage of a particular toxic category.  
TABLE 1.2
Toxic Hazardous/Dangerous Waste Designation Table
If your waste's toxic range falls in the‐   And your monthly or batch waste quantity is‐   Then your
wastes, designation is‐  
D Category …………………….    Greater than 100kg     ……………… DW  
X, A, B, or C …………………….   182 –l00kg   ………………….………. DW                                           
Category ……………………….    Greater than 100kg  ………………    EHW   
TABLE 1.3
Persistent Hazardous/Dangerous Waste Table
Dangerous Waste Number     Dangerous Waste Criteria andDesignation   
       Toxic Dangerous Wastes    
    FWTO1       EHW   
    FWT02       DW   
    FWPO1          EHW   
    FWP02         DW   
     Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbons    
    FWP03       EHW   
    Carcinogenic Dangerous Wastes
    FWCO1             EHW   
    FWC02             DW   
SCHEDULE 4
(a)   discarded chemical products;  
(b)   dangerous waste products;  
(c)   infectious dangerous wastes;  
(d)   dangerous waste mixture;  
(e)   toxic dangerous waste;  
(f)   persistent dangerous waste; and  
(g)   carcinogenic dangerous waste.  
    (a)   discard or intended to be discarded or described as abandoned i.e. disposal of or  
    burned or incinerated, accumulated, stored or treated (but not recycled) before or    
in lieu of being abandoned by being disposed through burning or incineration;  
(b)   burned for purposes of energy in lieu of their original intended uses;  
(c)   used to produce fuel in lieu of their original intended uses;  
(d)   applied to the land in lieu of their original intended use; or  
(e)   contained in products that are applied to land in lieu of their intended use.  
Schedule 5
[Regulation 5.]
Discharged chemical products
(a)   a commercial chemical product or manufacturing intermediate which has the generic name  
listed in the discarded chemical product list F AC 000‐000‐9903;  
(b)   an off‐specification commercial chemical product or manufacturing chemical intermediate  
which if it had met specification should have the generic name listed in the discarded  
chemical product list FAC 000‐000‐9903;  
(c)   any container or inner liner that have been used to hold any commercial chemical product or
manufacturing chemical intermediate that has, or any off‐specification commercial chemical product
or manufacturing chemical intermediate which if it had met specification would have the generic  name
listed on the acutely dangerous chemical product list of F AC 000‐000‐9903 unless the container   or inner liner is
empty and has been triple‐rinsed;  
(d)   any residue or contaminated soil, water, or other debris resulting from the clean up of a spill of a
commercial chemical product or manufacturing chemical intermediate which if it had met
specification would have the generic name listed in the discarded chemical product list FAC 000‐000‐
9903.  
(2) The materials or items described in (a), (b), (c) and (d) of this sub‐paragraph shall be designated as dangerous
waste when they are.  
SCHEDULE 6
[Regulation 7.]
List of infectious wastes
(a)   culture and stock of infectious agents;  
(b)   pathological wastes;  
(c)   human blood waste and products of blood;  
(d)   sharp instruments that have been used in patient care or in medical, research, or industrial  
laboratories;  
(e)   contaminated animal carcasses, body parts, etc.;  
V)   wastes from surgery or autopsy that were in contact with infectious agents, etc.;  
(g)   laboratory wastes from medical, pathological, pharmaceutical or other research, commercial or
industrial laboratories.  
(b)   a person whose waste mixture contains one or more toxic constituents shall determine the  
equivalent concentration for his waste from the following formula‐  
= x%     A%        B%     C%    D%                                                                                                                                                         
         +    ‐‐‐‐  +  ‐‐‐‐   +   ‐‐‐‐‐  +   ‐‐‐‐‐‐‐                                                                                                                                      
    10      100    1,000   10,000  
SCHEDULE 7
[Regulation 10 (2).]
Toxic Hazardous/Dangerous Waste Designation Table
If your waste's toxic range falls in the‐   And your monthly or batch waste quantity is‐   Then your wastes, designation is‐  
D Category …………………….       Greater than 100kg ……………    DW  
   
X, A, B, or C …………………….   182 –l00kg ………………….……….     DW   
Category ………………………. Greater than 100kg     ………………    EHW   
Schedule 8
Extraction Procedure (EP) Toxicity List
Dangerous waste    Contaminant   EHW maximum       D W maximum                                                   
number        concentration in extract (mg/l)   concentration in extract      
        (mg/l)    
FD 004     Arsenic         500       5 ‐ 500  
FD 005     Barium         10,000       100 ‐ 10,000  
FD 006     Cadmium       100       1 ‐ 100  
FD 007     Chromium       500       5 ‐ 500  
FD 008     Lead         500       5 ‐ 500  
FD 009     Mercury       20       02 ‐ 20  
FD 010     Se1enuim       100       1 ‐ 100  
FD 011     Silver         500       5 ‐ 500  
FD 012     Endrin         2       0.02 ‐ 20  
FD 013     Lindane        40       0.4 ‐ 40  
FD 014     Methoxychlor       1,000       10 ‐ 1,000  
FD 015     Toxaphene       50       0.5 ‐ 50  
FD 016     2,4 ‐ D         1,000       10 ‐ 1,000  
FD017     2,4,5,‐T        100       1‐100  
(3) Two levels of concentration are established for the contaminants listed (Schedule 9) Any waste containing one
or more contaminants with concentrations in EHW (extremely hazardous waste) ranges shall cause that waste to
be designated EHW. Any waste containing contaminants which occur at concentrations in the dangerous waste
(DW) range only (i.e. no EHW contaminants) shall be designated DW.  
SCHEDULE 9
Generic Hazardous/Dangerous Waste Numbers Table
Dangerous waste criteria     Dangerous waste number    Dangerous waste criteria and                                                     
         designation toxic dangerous waste   
Toxic dangerous waste ………………….    FWTC 1        EHW
             FMT 02              DW   
Persistent dangerous……………………    FWPC 1        EHW   
Halogenated hydrocarbons……………..   FWP 02        DW    
Polycyclic aromatic  hydrocarbons………….. FWP03       EHW   
Carcinogenic dangerous wastes……………… FWC 01        EHW    
      FWC 02        DW  
   
Schedule 10
Maximum concentration of constituents for ground water protection
    Constituents         Maximum concentration (mg 1‐1)  
Arsenic   ……………………………………………………………………….    .0.05  
Barium ............................................................................     1.0  
Cadmium……………………………………………………………………….     0.01  
Chromium ………………………………………………………………..    0.05  
Lead …………………………………………………………………………………    0.05  
Mercury ……………………………………………………………………………..    0.002  
Selenium ……………………………………………………………………………    0.01  
Silver …………………………………………………………………………………….    0.05  
Endrin   ………………………………………………………………………………..          0.0002 Waste analysis  
Lindane………………………………………………………………………………     0.004  
Methoxychlor…………………………………………………………………………………………..   0.1  
Toxaphene ………………………………………………………………………………………………… 0.005  
2, 4,‐D………………………………………………………………………………………………………..   0.1  
2,4, 5‐TP Silver (Tree Killer)……………………………………………………………………… 0.01
Handling codes for Hazardous/Dangerous Waste Management
1. Storage‐  
FSOI     Container (barrel, drum, etc.)  
FS02     Tank  
FS03     Waste pile  
FS04     Surface impoundment  
FS05     Other (specify)  
2. Treatment‐  
(a)   Thermal Treatment  
    FT06     Liquid injection incinerator  
    FT07     Rotary kiln incinerator  
    FT08     Fluidised bed incinerator  
    FT09     Multiple hearth incinerator  
    FT10    Infrared furuace incinerator  
    FT11     Molten salt destructor  
    FTl2     Pyrolysis  
    FTl3     Wet air oxidation  
    FTl4     Ca1cinator  
    FTl5     Microwave discharge  
    FTl6     Cement kiln  
    FTl 7   Lime kiln  
    FTl8     Other (specify)  
(b)   Chemical Treatment  
    FTl9     Absorption mound  
FT20     Absorption field  
FT21     Chemical fixation  
FT22     Chemical oxidation  
FT23     Chemical precipitation  
FT24     Chemical reduction  
FT25     Chlorination  
FT26     Chlorinolysis  
FT27     Cyanide destruction  
FT28     Degradation  
FT29     Detoxification  
FT30     Ion exchange  
FT31     Neutralisation  
FT32     Ozonation  
FT33     Photolysis  
FT34     Other (specify)  
(c)   Chemical Treatment  
(i)   Separation of Components  
FT35     Centrifugation  
FT36     Clarification  
FT37     Coagulation  
FT38     Decanting  
FT39     Encapsulation  
FT40     Filtration  
FT 41     Flocculation  
FT42     Flotation  
FT43     Foaming  
FT44     Sedimentation  
FT45   Thickening  
FT46     Ultra‐filtration  
    FT47   Other (specify)  
(ii)   Removal of specific components  
FT48     Absorption‐molecular sieve  
FT49     Activated carbon  
FT50     Blending  
FT51     Catalysis  
FT52     Crystallisation  
FT53     Dialysis  
FT54     Distillation  
FT55     Electrodialysis  
FT56     Electrolysis  
FT57     Evaporation  
FT58     High gradient magnetic separation  
FT59     Leaching  
FT60     Liquid ion exchange  
FT61     Liquid‐liquid extraction  
FT62     Reserve osmosis  
FT63     Solvent recovery  
FT64     Stripping  
FT65     Sand filter  
FT66     Other (specify)  
(d)   Biological Treatment  
FT67     Activated sludge  
FT68   Aerobic lagoon  
FT69     Aerobic tank  
FT70     Anaerobic lagoon or tank  
FT71     Compo sting  
FT72     Septic tank  
FT73     Spray irrigation  
    FT74   Thickening filter  
    FT75   Trickling filter  
    FT76   Waste stablisation pond  
    FT77   Other (specify)  
    FT78 ‐ 79   (Reserved)  
(e)   Disposal  
    FD80   Underground injection  
    FD81   Landfill  
    FD82   Land treatment  
    FD83   Ocean disposal  
    FD84   Surface impoundment (to be closed as a landfill)  
    FD85   Other (Specify)  
SCHEDULE 11
1.0   Hazardous (Dangerous) Chemical Products (FAC 000‐000‐9903)
1.1   Acutely Hazardous (Dangerous) Chemical Products List  
Hazardous                       Substance                                               FEPA*                                  Reason for                                               
Dangerous                                                                                        harzardous                            designation                                          
Waste No.                       designation
FA023     Acetaldehyde, chloro‐ ……………………………    EHW      BH
  FBOO1   Acetaldehyde ………………………………………..    EHW      C
FB034    Acetaldehyde, trichloro ……………………………    EHW      H
FAOO2     Acetamide, N‐ (aminothioxomethyl) ............... .EHW       B    
FA057     Acetamide, 2‐fluoro ..................................... . EHW       BH    
FA058     Acetic acid, fluoro‐sodium salt ..........................   EHW       AH  
FB144     Acetic acid, lead salt ..........................................   EHW       DEP    
FA066   Acetimidic acid, N‐[methylcarbamoyl) oxy]        
thio‐methyl ester ................................................     EHW       B    
FB003   Acetonitrile ........................................................     EHW       CI    
FAOO1   3 ‐( alpha‐ Acetonyl‐benzyl)‐4‐hydroxycoumarin        
and salts ..............................................................     EHW       A    
FAOO2     l‐Acetyl‐2‐thiourea ............................................     EHW     B    
FBOO6     Acetyl chloride ..................................................     EHW     CHaR    
FA003     Aero lein ..............................................................     EHW     X    
FBOO7     Acrylamide ........................................................     EHW     C    
FBOO8     Acrylic acid ........................................................     EHW     COL    
FBOO9     Acrylonitrile ........................................................     EHW     C+l    
FA070     Aldicarb ..............................................................     EHE     B    
FAOO4     Aldrin ..................................................................     EHW     XH    
FAOO5     Allyl alcohol ......................................................     EHW     B    
FAOO6     Aluminium phosphide ........................................     EHW     BR    
FAOO7     5 (Aminomethyl)‐3 isoxazolo ............................     EHW     B  
FAOO8     4‐Aminopyridine ................................................     EHW     B    
FAOO9     Ammonium picrate ............................................     EHW     B    
FA1l9     Ammonium vanadate ..........................................     EHW     B    
FB012     Aniline ................................................................     EHW     CI    
FBOIO     Arsenic acid ........................................................     EHW     B    
FA012     Arsenic (III) oxide ..............................................     EHW     B+    
FAOll     Arsenic (V) oxide ..............................................     EHW     B    
FAOll     Arsenic pentoxide ..............................................     EHW     B    
FA012   Arsenic trioxide ..................................................     EHW     B+    
FA038     Arsine, diethyl‐ ..................................................     EHW     B    
FB015     Azaserine ............................................................     EHW     C+    
FA054     Aziridine ............................................................     EHW     B+    
FBO10    Azirino (2, 3 : 3,4) pyrrolo (1, 2a) indole 4,                                                                                                
    7‐dione, 6‐amino‐ [8 (amino carbonyl) oxy)                                                                                         
    methyl]‐1, 1a, 2, 8a,                                                                                                                         
    8b‐hexahydro‐8a‐methoxy‐5‐methyl‐ ................................   EHW     B+
FA013     Barium cyanide ..................................................     EHW     A    
FB157     Benz [j] acenathrylene, 1,2,         EHW     HP    
FB017     Benzyl chloride ..................................................     EHW     DH    
FB018     Benz [a] anthracene ............................................     EHW     p*    
FB018     1, 2‐Benzanthracene ..........................................     EHW     p*    
FB094     1, 2‐Benzanthracene, 7,   l2‐dimethyl‐ ................     EHW     CP    
FB012     Benzenamine ......................................................     EHW     C    
FA024     Benzenamine, 4‐chloro‐ ......................................     EHW     CH    
FB049     Benzenamine, 4‐chloro‐2‐methyl‐ ......................     EHW     H    
FB093     Benzenamine, N, N‐dimethyl‐4 (phenylazo)‐ .........     EHW     C+    
FB158     Benzenamine, 4, 4‐methylenebis (2‐chloro)‐ ....     EHW     H+    
FAOn     Benzenamine, 4‐nitro‐ ........................................     EHW     D    
FA028     Benzene, (chloromethyl)‐ ..................................     EHW     BH+    
FB019     Benzene ..............................................................     EHW     C+l    
FB038     Benzeneacetic acid, 4‐chloro‐alpha‐( 4‐chloro‐phel        
    ethyl ..................................................................     EHW     H    
FB030     Benzene, l‐bromo‐4‐phenoxy‐ ..........................     EHW     H    
FB037     Benzene, chloro‐ ................................................     EHW     BH1   
FB190     1, 2‐Benzenedicarboxylic acid anthydride ..........     EHW     C    
FB070     Benzene, 1, 2‐dichloro‐ ......................................     EHW     BH    
FB071    Benzene,  1, 3‐dichloro‐ ......................................     EHW     BH    
FBOn     Benzene, 1, 4‐dichloro‐ ......................................     EHW     BH    
FB017     Benzene, 1,3 (dichloromethyl)‐ ........................     EHW     DH  
FB223     Benzene, 1, 3‐disocyanatomethyl‐ ......................     EHW     BR    
FB239     Benzene, dimethyl‐ ............................................     EHW     C1   
FB201     1, 3‐Benzenediol ................................................     EHW     C    
FB127     Benzene, hexachloro‐ ........................................     EHW     H    
FB056     Benzene, hexahydro‐ ..........................................     EHW     C    
FB188     Benzene, hydroxy ..............................................     EHW     C    
FB220     Benzene, methyl ................................................     EHW     C    
FB105     Benzene, l‐methyl‐ 1,2,4 dinitro ......................     EHW     C    
FB106     Benzene, l‐methyl‐2, 6‐dinitro‐ ........................     EHW     C1   
FB055     Benzene, (l‐methylethyl)‐ ................................     EHW     C    
FB169     Benzene, nitro ....................................................     EHW     H    
FB183     Benzene, pentachloro ..........................................     EHW     DH+    
FB185     Benzene, pentachloronitro ..................................     EHW     DHOP    
FB020     Benzenesulphonic acid chloride ........................     EHW     DHOP    
FB020     Benzenesulphonyl chloride ................................     EHW     DH    
FB207     Benzene, 1,2,4,5 tetrachloro‐ ..........................     EHW     HOR    
FB023     Benzene, (trichloromethyl)‐ ................................        
FA042     1, 2‐ Benzenediol, 4‐( l‐hydroxy‐ 2‐( methylamino)        
    ethyl)‐ ................................................................     EHW     B    
FA014     Benzenethiol ......................................................     EHW     A    
FB021    Benzidine ............................................................     EHW     B+    
FB022     Benzo (a) pyrene ................................................     EHW     P+    
FB022     3, 4‐Benzopyrene ................................................     EHW     P+    
FB197     p‐Benzo uinone ..................................................     EHW     C    
FB023     Benzotrichloride ................................................     EHW     HOR    
FB050     1, 2‐Benzphenanthrene ......................................     EHW     P+    
FA028     Benzyl chloride ..................................................     EHW     PH+    
FA015     Beryllium dust…………………………………………………     EHW     C+  
FB085     2, 2‐Bioxirane………………………………………………………     EHW     B1
FB021     (1,1 '‐Biphenyl)‐4, 4'‐diamine…………………………………….   EHW     B+  
FB073     (1, 1'‐Biphenyl)‐4, 4'‐diamine, 3, 3‐dichloro‐………………………… EHW     H+  
FB095     (1, 1'‐Biphenyl)‐4, 4'‐diamine, 3, 3‐dimethyl‐…………………………….EHW       C+  
FB024     Bis (2‐chloroethoxy) methane ………………………………………… EHW     CH  
FB027     Bis (2‐chloroisoprooyl) ether …………………………………….. EHW     CHG  
FA016     Bis (chloromethyl) ether ………………………………………….   EHW     CH+  
FB246     Bromine cyanide…………………………………………………..     EHW     CH  
FA017     Bromoacetone……………………………………………………………   EHW     CH  
FB225     Bromoform ………………………………………………………………….. EHW     H  
FB030     4‐Bromophenyl phenyl ether ………………………………………….. EHW     H  
FA018     Brucine………………………………………………………………………………..   EHW     A  
FB128     1, 3‐Butadiene, 1, 1,2,3,4, 4‐hexachloro‐ ………………………….. EHW     CH  
FB035     Butanoic acid 4‐[bis (2‐chloroethyl) amino]  
    benzene‐ ………………………………………………………………………………. EHW     H  
FB160     2‐Butanone peroxide ………………………………………………………. EHW     BR  
FB074     2‐Butene, 1, 4‐dichloro‐ ……………………………………………………… EHW     B1
FB053     2‐Butenal............................................................     EHW     B1
FB074     2‐Butene, 1, 4‐dichloro‐ ………………………………………………………. EHW     CH1
FB032     Calcium chromate……………………………………………………………   EHW     C+EP  
FA021    Calcium cyanide……………………………………………………………   EHW     B  
FA123     Camphene, octachloro‐ …………………………………………………… EHW     XH  
FA097     Camphor ………………………………………………………………….. EHW     A  
FA178     Carbamic acid, methylnitroso‐ethyl ester …………………………… EHW     C+  
FB176     Carbamide, N‐ethyl‐nitroso……………………………………………………. EHW     C+  
FB177     Carbamide, N‐methyl‐N‐nitros …………………………………………… EHW     C+  
FB219     Carbamide, thio‐…………………………………………………………………….. EHW     C+  
FA103     Carbamimidoselenoic acid…………………………………………………….. EHW     B  
FB097     Carbamoyl chloride, dimethyl....................................................EHW     DH+  
FA022     Carbon bisulphide ……………………………………………………………… EHW     D1?  
FA022     Carbon disulphide……………………………………………………………..   EHW     D1?  
FB156     Carbonocholoridic acid, methyl ester………………………………………. EHW     BH1
FB033     Carbon oxyfluoride …………………………………………………………….. EHW        BHR  
FB211    Carbon tetrachloride………………………………………………………….   EHW     CH+  
FA095     Carbonyl chloride ……………………………………………………………. EHW     BH  
FB033     Carbonyl fluoride ……………………………………………………………….. EHW     BHR  
FB035     Chlorambucil...............................................................    EHW     H+  
FB036     Chlodane, trechnical …………………………………………………………… EHW     XH  
FA033     Chlorine cyanide……………………………………     EHW   AH  
FB026     Chlnaphazine……………………………………………     EHW   H+  
FA023     Chloroacetaldehyde …………………………………… EHW   BH  
FA024     p‐Chloroanilin ……………………………………………   EHW   CH  
FB037     Chlorobenzene ............................................... EHW   BH1   
FB039     4‐Chloro‐m‐Cresol ........................................... .EHW   H    
FB041     1‐Chloro‐2, 3‐epoxypropane ..............................   EHW   CH+1   
FB042     2‐Chloroethyl vinyl ether ....................................   EHW   CH    
FB044     Chloroform ........................................................   EHW   CH+    
FB046     Chloromethyl methyl ether ................................   EHW   DH+1   
FB047     beta‐Chloronaphtalene ........................................   EHW   DH    
FB048     O‐Chlorophenol ..................................................   EHW   DH    
FA026   1‐(o‐Chlorophenyl) thiourea ..............................   EHW   AH    
FA027     3‐Chloropropionitrile ..........................................   EHW   BH    
FB049     4‐Chloro‐o‐tuluidine, hydrochloride ..................   EHW   H    
FB032     Chromic acid, calcium salt ..................................   EHW   C+EP    
FB050     Chrysene ............................................................   EHW   P+    
FA029     Copper cyanides ................................................   EHW   B    
FB052     Cresols ................................................................   EHW   B    
FB052     Cresylic acid ......................................................   EHW   B    
FB053     Crotonaldehyde ..................................................   EHW   B    
FB055     Cummene ............................................................   EHW   Cl    
FA030     Cyanides (soluble cyanide salts), not elsewhere        
    specified ..............................................................   EHW   A    
FA031     Cyanogen ............................................................   EHW   B1    
FB246     Cyanogen bromide ..............................................   EHW   CH    
FA033     Cyanogen chloride ..............................................   EHW   AH    
FB197     1, 4‐Cyclohexadienedione ..................................   EHW   C    
FB056     Cyclohexane ......................................................   EHW   C1   
FB057     Cyclohexanone ..................................................   EHW   C1
FB130     1,3‐Cyclopentadiene,   1,2,3,4,5,   EHW   XH  
    5,‐hexachloro ......................................................        
FB058     Cyclophosphamide ............................................   EHW   CH+1   
FB240   2, 4‐D, salts and esters ........................................   EHW   BH    
FB060   DDD ..................................................................   EHW   CH+    
FB06l   DDT ....................................................................   EHW   XH+    
FB142   Decachlorooctahydro‐   1,3,4, ‐metheno‐2H        
cyclobuta [c, d,]‐ pentalen‐2‐one ........................   EHW   XH    
FB062   Diallate ................................................................   EHW   CH+    
FA133   Diamine ..............................................................   EHW   B+R    
FB063   Dibenz [a, h] anthracene ....................................   EHW   AP+    
FB063   1,2   : 5, 6‐Dibenzanthracene ..............................  EHW   P+A    
FB064   1,2   : 7, 8‐Dibenzopyrene ..................................   EHW   P+    
FB064   Dibenz [a, i] pyrene ............................................   EHW   P+    
FB066   1, 2‐Dibromo‐3‐ Chloropropane ........................   EHW   CH+    
FB062   S‐ (2, 3‐Dichloroally) dicopropylthio   EHW   CH+    
carbamate ............................................................        
FB070   o‐Dichlorobenzene ..............................................   EHW   BH    
FB07l   m‐Dichlorobenzene ............................................   EHW   BH    
FBOn   p‐Dichlorobenzene ..............................................   EHW   BH    
FB073   3, 3‐Dichlorobenzidine ......................................   EHW   B+    
FB074   1, 4‐Dichloro‐2‐butene ......................................   EHW   CHI    
FB075   Dichlorodifluor‐omethane ..................................   EHW   H    
FB060   Dichloro diphenyl dichloroethane ......................   EHW   CH+    
FB06l   Dichloro diphenyl trichloroethane ......................   EHW   XH+    
FB078   1, l‐Dichloroethylene ........................................   EHW   CH+    
FB079   1, 2‐Dichloroethylene ........................................   EHW   DH    
FB025   Dichloroethyl ......................................................   EHW   CH    
FB08l   2, 4‐Dichlorophenol ............................................   EHW   DH    
FB082   2, 6‐Dichlorophenol ............................................   EHW   DH    
FB240   2, 4‐Dichlorophenoxyacetic acid, salt and   EHW   BH    
esters ..................................................................        
FA036   Dichlorophenylarsine ..........................................   EHW   BH    
FB083   1, 2‐Dichloropropane ..........................................   EHW   CHI    
FA037   Dieldrine ............................................................   EHW   XH+    
FB085   1,2,3, 4‐Diepoxybutane ....................................   EHW   Bl    
FA038   Diethylarsine ......................................................   EHW   B    
FA039   0, O‐Diethyl S‐[2‐( ethylthio) ethyl]       
phosphorodithioate ............................................   EHW   A    
FB087   0, O‐Diethyl‐S‐methyl‐dithiophosphate ..............   EHW   B    
FA04l   Diethyl‐p‐nitrophenylphosphate ........................   EHW   A  
FA040   0, O‐Diethyl‐pyrazenyl phosphorothioate ..........   EHW   A    
FA043   Disopropyl fluorophosphate ..............................   EHW   BH    
FA044   Dimethoate ..........................................................   EHW   A    
FB092   Dimethylamine ..................................................   EHW   Cl    
FB093   Dimethylaminoazobenze ....................................   EHW   C+    
FB094   7, l2‐Dimethylbenz[a]‐anthracene ....................   EHW   CP    
FB095   3, 3‐Dimethylbenzidine ......................................   EHW   C+    
FB096   alpha, alpha‐Dimethylbenzylhydroperer Oxide ..   EHW   CR    
FB097   Dimethy1carbamoy1chloride ..............................   EHW   DH+    
FB099   1, 2‐Dimethylhydrazine ......................................   EHW   C+l    
FA045   3, 3‐Dimethyl‐l‐(methylthio‐butanone, O‐[(methy        
carbonyl] oxime ................................................   EHW   B    
FA07l   0, O‐Dimethyl O‐p‐nitrophenyl   EHW   A    
phosphorothioate ................................................        
FA082   Dimethylnitrosamine ..........................................   EHW   B+    
FA046   Alpha, alpha‐Dimethylphenethylamine ..............   EHW   C    
FB103   Dimethyl sulphate ..............................................   EHW   CO+    
FA047   4, 6‐Dinitro‐o‐cresol and salts ............................   EHW   B    
FA034   4, 6‐Dinitro‐o‐cydohexylphenol ........................   EHW   C    
FA048   2, 4‐Dinitrophenol ..............................................   EHW   B    
FB105   2, 4‐Dinitrotoluene ..............................................   EHW   C    
FB106   2, 6‐Dinitrotoluene ..............................................   EHW   C    
FA020   Dinoseb ..............................................................   EHW   B    
FB109   1, 2‐Diphenylhydrazine ......................................   EHW   C    
FB035   Diphosphoramide, octamethyl ............................   EHW   ?    
FBIlO   Dipropylamine ....................................................   EHW   C??    
FBI 11   Di‐n‐propylnitrosamine ......................................   EHW   C+    
FA039   Disulphoton ........................................................   EHW   A    
FA049   2, 4‐Dithiobiuret ................................................   EHW   A    
FA109   Dithiopyrophosphoric acid, tetraethyl ester ........   EHW   A    
FA050   Endosulphan ......................................................   EHW   XH    
FA088   Endothiol ............................................................   EHW   B    
FA051   Endrin ................................................................   EHW   XH    
FA042   Epinephrine ........................................................   EHW   B    
FBOOI   Ethanal ................................................................   EHW   C    
FBI74   Ethanamine, N‐ethyI‐N‐nitroso ..........................   EHW   C+    
FA046   Ethanamine,   1,   l‐dimethyl‐W‐phenyl‐ ..............   EHW   C    
FB067   Ethane,  1, 2‐dibromo‐ ........................................   EHW   CH+    
FB076   Ethane,  1,   l‐dichlorol‐ ........................................   EHW   DH    
FBOn   Ethane,  1, 2‐dichloro‐ ........................................   EHW   DH    
FBII4   1, 2‐Ethanedrylibiscarba‐modithioc acid ............   EHW   B    
FBI31   Ethane,  1,   1,   1,2,2, 2,‐hexachloro‐ ....................   EHW   H    
FB024   Ethane,  1,   1‐[ methylenebis (oxy) bis  EHW   CH    
[2‐chloro‐ ............................................................        
FB247   Ethane,  I,I,I‐trichlor‐2‐2‐bis   EHW   DH    
(p‐metoxypheny) ................................................        
FB003   Ethanenitrile ........................................................   EHW   C    
FB025   Ethane,  1,   1, oxybis 2‐chloro ..............................   EHW   CH    
FBI84   Ethane, pentachloro‐ ..........................................   EHW   AH    
FB208   Ethane,  1,   1,   1, 2‐tetrachloro‐ ............................  EHW   H    
FB209   Ethane,  1,   1,2, 2‐tetrachloro‐ ............................   EHW   H    
FB227   Ethane,  1,   1, 2‐irichloro‐ ....................................   EHW   CH    
FB084   Ethenamine, N‐methy I‐N‐nitroso ....................   EHW   B+    
FB043   Ethene, chloro‐ ....................................................   EHW   DH+    
FB042   Ethane, 2‐chloroethoxy‐ ....................................   EHW   CH    
FB078   Ethene,  1,   l‐dichloro‐ ........................................   EHW   CH+    
FB079   Ethene, trans‐I, 2‐dichloro‐ ................................   EHW   DH    
FB210   Ethene,  1,   1,2, 2‐tetrachloro‐ ............................   EHW   CH    
FBOO6   Ethanoyl chloride ................................................   EHW   CH    
FBlOi   Ethyl cyanide ......................................................   EHW   B    
FB038   Ethyl 4, 4‐dic1orobenzilate ..................................   EHW   DH    
FBII4   Ethylenebis (dithiocarbamic acid), salts and       
esters ..................................................................   EHW   B    
FB067   Ethylene dibromide ............................................   EHW   CH    
FBon   Ethylene dichloride ............................................   EHW   DH    
FBl15   Ethylene oxide ....................................................   EHW   CI    
FA054   Ethylenimine ......................................................   EHW   B+    
FB076   Ethylidene dichloride ..........................................   EHW   DH    
FA056   Fluorine ..............................................................   EHW   B    
FA057   Fluoroacetamide ................................................   EHW   BH    
FA058   Fluoracetic acid, sodium salt ..............................   EHW   AH    
FB122   Formaldehyde ....................................................   EHW   C    
FA065   Fulminic acid, mercury (II) salt ..........................   EHW   R?    
FB125   2‐Furancarboxaldehyde ......................................   EHW   C?    
FB147   2, 5‐Furandione ..................................................   EHW   C    
FB125   Furfural ..............................................................   EHW   C?    
FB126   Glycidylaldeyade ................................................   EHW   C+    
FB163   Guanidine N‐nitroso‐N‐methyl‐N'nitro‐ ............   EHW   C+    
FA059   Heptachlor ..........................................................   EHW   XH+    
FB127   Hexachlorobenzene ............................................   EHW   H    
FB128   Hexachlorobutadiene ..........................................   EHW   CH    
FB130   Hexachlorocyc1opentadiene (gamma isomer) ....   EHW   XH    
FA05l   1,2,3,4,  10,   IO‐Hexachloro‐6, 7‐epoxy‐l, 4,        
4a, 5, 6, 7, 8a‐octahydro‐endo, end‐I, 4, 5,       
8‐dimetha‐nophalene ..........................................   EHW   XH    
FA037   1,2,3,4,  10,   IO‐Hexachloro‐6, 7‐epoxy‐l, 4,        
4a, 5, 6, 7, 8, 8a‐octahydro‐endo‐, exo‐l, 4, 5,        
8, ‐dimethanonaphalene ......................................   EHW   XH+    
FB13l   Hexachloroethane ..............................................   EHW   H    
FA060   1,2,3,4,  10,   IO‐Hexachloro‐l, 4, 4a, 5, 8,       
8a‐hexahydro‐ 1,4,5, 8 ‐endo        
endo‐dimethanonapha‐leine ................................   EHW   BH    
FAOO4   1,2,3,4,  10,   IO‐Hexachloro‐l, 4, 4a, 5, 8,        
8a‐hexahydro‐l, 4, 5, 8‐endo,        
exodimethanonaphthalene ..................................   EHW   BH    
FA060   Hexachlorohexahydro‐endo endodimethanonaphtl        
............................................................................   EHW   BH    
HB132   Hexachlorophene ................................................   EHW   CH    
FB243   Hexachloropropane ............................................   EHW   H    
FA062   Hexaethyltetraphosphate ....................................   EHW   B    
FB133   Hydrazine ............................................................   EHW   B+R    
FBl16   Hydrazinecarbothioamide ..................................   EHW   B    
FB099   Hydraxine,   1, 2‐dimethyl‐ ..................................   EHW   C+    
FB109   Hydrazine,   1, 2‐diphenyl‐ ..................................   EHW   C    
FA068   Hydrazine, methyl‐ ............................................   EHW   A    
FA063   Hydrocyanic acid ................................................   EHW   A    
FA063   Hydrogen cyanide ..............................................   EHW   A    
FA096   Hydrogen phosphide ..........................................   EHW   B    
FB135   Hydrogen sulphide ..............................................   EHW   Bl    
FB096   Hydroperoxide‐methyl‐l‐phenyletyl‐ ................   EHW   CR    
FB245   Indomethacin ......................................................   EHW   BH    
FA064   Isocyanic acid, methyl ester ................................   EHW   17  
FAOO7   3   (2H)‐Isozalone, 5‐(animomethyl) ....................   EHW   B    
FB142   Kepone ................................................................   EHW   XH    
FB143   Lasiocarpine ........................................................   EHW   C+    
FB144   Lead acetate ........................................................   EHW   DEP    
FB129   Lindane ..............................................................   EHW   H+    
FB147   Maleic anhydride ................................................   EHW   C    
FB149   Malononitrile ......................................................   EHW   C    
FB151   Mercury ..............................................................   EHW   EP    
FA092   Mercury (acetato‐O), phenyl‐ ..............................   EHW   B    
FA065   Mercury fulminate ..............................................   EHW   R7    
FB152   Methacrylotrinile ................................................   EHW   B    
FB092   Methanemine, N‐methyl ....................................   EHW   C    
FA016   Methane, oxybis (chloro)‐ ..................................   EHW   BH+    
FA112   Methane, tetranitro‐ ............................................   EHW   AR    
FB029   Methane, bromo ..................................................   EHW   H    
FB045   Methane, chloro‐ ................................................   EHW   H    
FB046   Methane chloromethyoxy‐ ..................................   EHW   DH+    
FB068   Methane, dibromo‐ ............................................   EHW   CH+    
FB080   Methane, dichloro‐ ..............................................   EHW   CH    
FB075   Methane, dichlorodiphloro‐ ................................   EHW   H    
FB138   Methane, iodo‐ ....................................................   EHW   H+    
FB2ll   Methane, tetrachloro‐ ..........................................   EHW   CH+    
FAll 8   Methanethiol, trichloro‐ ......................................   EHW   H    
FB153   Methanethiol ......................................................   EHW   B    
FB225   Methane, tribromo ..............................................   EHW   H    
FB12l   Methane, trichorofluoro‐ ....................................   EHW   H    
FB044   Methane, trichloro‐ ............................................   EHW   CHI    
FA059   4,7‐Methano‐H‐indeno,   1,4,5,6, 7, 8,        
8‐heptachloro‐3a, 4, 7, 7a‐tetrahydro‐        
FA036   4,7‐Methanoindan,   1,2,4,5,6, 7, 8,        
8‐octachloro‐3a, 4, 7, 7a‐tetrahydro‐ ..................   EHW   XH    
FA066   Methomyl ............................................................   EHW   B  
FA067   2‐Methylaziridine ..............................................   EHW   B+    
FA068   Methyl hydrazine ................................................   EHW   AI    
FA064   Methyl isocyanate ..............................................   EHW   1    
FA069   2‐Methyllactonitrite ............................................   EHW   A    
FA07l   Methyl parathion ................................................   EHW   A    
FB029   Methyl bromide ..................................................   EHW   H    
FB045   Methyl chloride ..................................................   EHW   HI    
FB156   Methyl chlorocarbonate ......................................   EHW   GHI    
FB226   Methyl chloroform ..............................................   EHW   CH    
FB157   3‐methy1chlorlanthrene ......................................   EHW   HP    
FB158   4, 4‐methylenebis (2‐chloroniline) ....................   EHW   H+    
FB132   2, 2‐methylenebis (3, 4, 6‐trichorophenol) ........   EHW   CH    
FB068   Methylene bromide ............................................   EHW   CH+    
FB080   Methylene chloride ............................................   EHW   CH    
FB1l2   Methylene oxide ................................................   EHW   C    
FB160   Methyl ethyl ketone peroxide ............................   EHW   BR    
FB138   Methyl iodide ......................................................   EHW   H+    
FB163   N‐Methyl‐N‐nitro‐N‐nitrosoquanidine ..............   EHW   C+R    
FBOlO   Mitomyein C ......................................................   EHW   B+    
FB165   Naphthalene ........................................................   EHW   B    
FB047   Naphthalene, 2‐chloro‐ ......................................   EHW   DH    
FB166   1, 4‐Naphthalenedione ........................................   EHW   C    
FB236   2, 7‐Naphthalenedisulphonic acid, 3, 3‐ [(3, 3        
dimethyl‐ (1, l‐biphenyl)‐ 4, 4 diyl)] ‐bis (azo)        
bis (5‐amino‐4‐hydroxy, tetrasodium salt ..........   EHW   H+    
FBl16   1,4, naphthaquinone ..........................................   EHW   C    
FB167   l‐naphtylamine ..................................................   EHW   B+    
FB168   2‐naphthalamine ................................................   EHW   B+    
FB167   alpha‐naphthalamine ..........................................   EHW   B+    
FB168   beta‐naphthalamine ............................................   EHW   B+    
FB026   2‐Naphthalamine, N, N‐bis (2‐chloromethyl)‐ ..   EHW   H+    
FAOn   alpha‐Naphthylthiorea ........................................   EHW   B    
FA073   Nickel carbonyl ..................................................   EHW   B    
FA074   Nickel cyanide ....................................................   EHW   DR    
FA074   Nickel (II) cyanide ..............................................   EHW   DR    
FA073   Nickel tetracarbonyl ............................................   EHW   B    
FA075   Nicotine and salts ................................................   EHW   B    
FA076   Nitric oxide ........................................................   EHW   B    
FA077   p‐Nitroaniline ......................................................   EHW   D    
FB169   Nitrobenzene ......................................................   EHW   C    
FA078   Nitrogen dioxide ................................................   EHW   A    
FA076   Nitrogen (II) oxide ..............................................   EHW   B    
FA078   Nigrogen (IV) oxide ..........................................   EHW   A    
FA08l   Nitroglycerine ....................................................   EHW   R    
FB170   p‐Nitrophenol ....................................................   EHW   C    
FB17l   2‐Nitropropane ..................................................   EHW   C    
FB174   N‐Nitrosodiethylamine ......................................   EHW   C+    
FA082   N‐Nitrosodiethylamine ......................................   EHW   B+    
FB176   N‐Nitroso‐N‐ethylurea ........................................   EHW   C+    
FB177   N‐Nitroso‐N‐methylurea ....................................   EHW   C+    
FB178   N‐Nitroso‐N‐methyluretane ................................   EHW   C+  
FA084   N‐Nitrosomethylvynl‐amine………………………………..   EHW   B+  
FB179   N‐Nitrosopiperidine ……………………………………. EHW   C+  
FBI 11   N‐Nitroso‐N‐propylamine………………………………………..  EHW   C+  
FA050   5‐Norbonene‐2, 3,‐dimethanol, 1,4,5,6,7,  
7‐hexachloro, cyclic sulphite……………………………….   EHW   XH  
FA085   Octamethylpyrophosphoramide ……………………………. EHW   A  
FA087   Osmium oxide ………………………………………………….. EHW   B  
FA087   Osmium tetroxide ………………………………………………. EHW   B  
FA088   7‐0xabicyclo (2, 2, 1) heptane‐2,  
3‐dicarboxylic acid ………………………………………………. EHW   B  
FB058   2 H1, 3, 2‐0xazaphosphorine, 2‐[bis  
(2‐chlo‐roethyl amino) tetrahydro‐, oxide 2‐ ……………EHW   CH+  
FB115   Oxirane…………………………………………………………….   EHW   X  
FB041   Oxirane, 2‐(chloromethyl)‐ ………………………………….. EHW   CH+  
FAO 9   Parathion ………………………………………………………….. EHW   X  
FB1 3   Pantachlorobenzene …………………………………………. EHW   H  
FB18   Panthachloroethane …………………………………………… EHW   AH  
FB185   Penthachloronitrobenzene …………………………………… EHW   DH   
See FE207   Penthachlorophenol............................................   EHW   AH  
FB188   Phenol................................................................   EHW   C  
FA034   Phenol, 2‐Cyclohexyl‐4, 6 dinitro‐ ………………………… EHW   C  
FA048   Phenol, 2, 4‐dinitro‐ ………………………………………….. EHW   C  
FA047   Phenol, 2, 4,‐dinitro‐6‐methyl, and salts …………………...EHW   B  
FA020   Phenol, 2, 4‐dinitro‐6‐(1‐methylpropyl)‐ …………………. EHW   B  
FA009   Phenol, 2, 4, 6‐trinitro‐ammonium salt …………………… EHW   R  
FB048   Phenol, 2‐chloro‐ ……………………………………………….. EHW   DH  
FB039   Phenol, 4‐chloro‐3‐methyl‐ ………………………………… EHW   H  
FB081 Phenol, 2, 4,‐dichloro‐ ……………………………………….. EHW   DH  
FB082   Phenol, 2, 6‐dichloro‐ ………………………………………… EHW   DH  
FB170   Phenol, 4‐nitro‐ ………………………………………………. EHW   C  
See   Phenol, pentachloro ………………………………………………………. EHW   AH  
See    FEF027 Phenol, 2, 3,4, 6‐tetrachloro‐ ……………………………… EHW   CH  
See    FEF027 Phenol, 2, 4, 5‐trichloro………………………………………   EHW   AH  
See    FEF027 Phenol, 2, 4, 6‐trichloro ………………………………………. EHW   AH  
FA036   Phenol dichloroarsine …………………………………………. EHW   BH  
FA092   Phenylmercuricatate …………………………………………… EHW   B  
FA093   N‐Phenylthoiurea ………………………………………………. EHW   A  
FA094   Phorate……………………………………………………………….   EHW   X  
FA095   Phosgene ……………………………………………………………….. EHW   BH  
FA096   Phosphine …………………………………………………………….. EHW   B  
FA041 Phosphoric acid, diethyl p‐nitophenyl ester  ………….. EHW   A  
F A044   Phosphorodithioic acid 0, O‐dimeth  
12‐[2‐(methylamino)‐ 2‐oxoethyl] ester ……………… EHW   X  
F A043   Phosphofluoride acid, bis(1‐methylpethyl)‐ester …………EHW   BH  
F A094   Phosphorothoic acid, 0, ‐diethyl S (ethylthio)  
methyl ester ………………………………………………….. EHW   X  
F A097   Phosphorothioic acid, 0, O‐dimeth 1 ‐[p‐di:  
ethylamino) ‐sulphonyl (phenyl ester) ……………….. EHW   A  
F A089   Phosphorothioic acid, 0, O‐diethyl  
O‐(p‐nitro‐phenyl) ester…………………………………………….. EHW   X  
F A040   Phosphorothioic acid, 0, O‐diethyl O‐pyrazinyl ester….. EHW   A  
FB189   Phosphorus sulphide……………………………………..   EHW   BIR  
FB190   Phthalic anhydride ………………………………………… EHW   C  
FB191   2‐Picoline ………………………………………………………… EHW   C  
FAllO   Plumbane, tetraethyl‐ …………………………………. EHW   A  
FA098   Potassium cyanide …………………………………………. EHW   A  
FA009   Potassium silver cyanide ………………………………………….EHW   A  
FA070   Prop anal, 2‐methyl‐2 (methylthio) O‐methylamino                                                                                                         
car‐bonyl] oxime  ……………………………………………………… EHW   B  
FB194   I‐Propanamine …………………………………………….. EHW   C  
FBllO   I‐Propanamine, N‐propyl‐  ………………………………….. EHW   C  
FB066   Propana, 1, 2‐dibromo‐3‐chloro   ……………………… EHW   CH+  
FB149   Propanedinitrile   ………………………………………………… EHW   C  
FB101 Propanenitrile ……………………………………………. EHW   B  
FB027   Propanenitrile, 3‐chloro   …………………………………. EHW   BH  
FA079   Propanenitrile, 2‐hydroxy‐2 methyl‐ ……………. EHW   A  
FB171 Propane, 2‐nitro‐ ………………………………………………. EHW   C  
FB027   Propane, 2, 2, oxybis [2‐choloro‐   ………………………………….. EHW   CHO  
FA081   1,2, 3‐Propanetriol, trinitrate‐ …………………………………………. EHW   R?  
FB235   I‐Propanol, 2, 3‐dibromo‐, phosphate (3 : 1)  ………………………. EHW   DH  
FB126   I‐Propanol, 2, 3‐epoxy‐ ………………………………………………………      EHW   C*  
FA017   2‐Propanone, ‐bromo‐ ………………………………………….    EHW   CH  
FA102   Prop argyl alcohol..................................................................   EHW   X  
FA003   2‐Propenal............................................................................   EHW   X  
FB007   2‐Propenamide ……………………………………………………………… EHW   C  
FB084   Propene, 1, 3‐dichloro‐ …………………………………………………. EHW   CH  
FB243   I‐Propene, 1, 1,2,3, 3‐hexachloro‐ …………………………………… EHW   H  
FB009   2‐Propenenitrile ………………………………………………………………. EHW   C*  
FB152   2‐Propenenitrile, 2‐methyl‐……………………………………………….   EHW   B  
FB008   2‐Propenoic acid ……………………………………………………………… EHW   COl  
FA005   2‐Propen‐l‐ol ……………………………………………………………………… EHW   B  
See   FEF207    Propionic acid, 2‐(2, 4, 5,‐trichlorophenoxy‐ …………………………… EHW   B  
FB194   n‐Propylamine …………………………………………………….    EHW   BH  
FB083   Propylene dichloride …………………………………………….    EHW   CH1  
FA067   1, 2‐Propylenimine ………………………………………………..    EHW   B+1
FA102   2‐Propyn‐l‐ol ……………………………………………………………   EHW   X  
FA008   4‐Pyridinamine …………………………………………………….    EHW   B  
FA075   Pyridine, (S)‐3‐(1‐methyl‐2‐ pyrrolidinyl)‐, and salt …………….. EHW   B  
FB196   Pyridine  …………………………………………………………………………… EHW   C1
FB179   Pyridine, hexahydro‐N‐nitroso‐ ………………………………    EHW   C+  
FB191 Pyridine, 2‐methyl‐ …………………………………………………… EHW   C  
FA11 1   Pyrophosphoric acid, terraethyl ester ………………………… EHW   A  
FB201   Resorcinol..........................................................…………… EHW   C  
F103   Selenourea ……………………………………………………….……….. EHW   B  
FB015   L‐Serine, diazoacetate (ester) …………………………………………. EHW   C+  
FA104   Silver cyanide ……………………………………………………………… EHW   C  
See     FEF027   Silvex ………………………………………………………………………….EHW   BH  
FA105   Sodium azide……………………………………………………..   EHW   A  
FA106   Sodium cyanide …………………………………………………… EHW   A  
FA107   Strontium sulphide …………………………………………….. EHW   R  
FA108   Strychnidin 1O‐one, and salts ……………………………. EHW   B  
FA018   Strychnidin‐1O, 2, 3‐dimethoxy‐……………………………   EHW   A  
FA108   Strychnine and salts …………………………………………… EHW   B  
FB135   Sulphide hydride………………………………………………..   EHW   B  
FB103   Sulphuric acid, dimethyl ester………………………….   EHW   CO+  
FB115   Sulphuric acid thallium (1) salt ……………………………. EHW   B  
B189   Sulphur phosphide ……………………………………………… EHW BIR  
See   FEF027 2,4, 5‐T …………………………………………………………….. EHW   BH*  
See   FEF027 1,2,4, 5‐Tetrachlorobenzene …………………………………………. EHW  DH  
FB208   1,1,1, 2‐Tetrachloroethane………………………………….   EHW   H  
FB209   1, 1,2, 2‐Tetrachloroethane ……………………………..…. EHW   H  
FB210   Tetracholoroethylene …………………………………… EHW   CH+  
FB2l2   2,3,4, 6,‐Tetrachloro phenol...............................   EHW   CH  
FB109   Tetraethyldithiopy rophosphate …………………………… EHW   A  
FA110 Tetraethyllead ……………………………………………………… EHW   A  
FA111 Tetraethylhyrophosphate……………………………………   EHW   A  
FA112   Tetranitromethane …………………………………………….. EHW   AR  
FA062   Tetraphosphoric acid, hexaethyl ester ……………………..EHW   B  
FA113   Thallic oxide ……………………………………………………….. EHW   B  
FA113   Thallium (III) oxide ………………………………………………. EHW   B  
FA114   Thallium (I) selenide……………………………………………   EHW   C  
FA115   Thallium (I) sulphate……………………………………………….. EHW   B  
FA045   Thiofanox   ……………………………………………………..EHW   B  
FA049   Thioimidodicarbonic diamide …………………………… EHW   A  
FB153   Thiometainol.........................................................   EHW   B1
FA014   Thiophenol..........................................................   EHW   A  
FA116   Thiosemicarbazide …………………………………………… EHW   BH+  
FB219   Thiourea ………………………………………………………………… EHW   C+  
FA026   Thiourea, 2‐(chlorophenyl)‐ ………………………………… EHW   AH  
FAOn   Thiourea, l‐naphtalenyl‐ …………………………………………. EHW   B  
FA093   Thiourea, Phenyl‐ ………………………………………………… EHW   A  
FB220   Toluene ………………………………………………………………. EHW   CI  
FB223   Toluene diisocyanate ………………………………………….. EHW   BR  
FA123   Toxaphene …………………………………………………………. EHW   XH  
FB226   1,1, l‐trichloroethane……………………………………………..   EHW   CH  
FB227   1, 1, 2‐trichloroethane………………………………………..   EHW   CH  
FB228   Trichloroethene…………………………………………………..   EHW   CH  
FB228   Trichloroethylene ………………………………………………… EHW   CH+  
FA11 8   Trichloromethanethiol........................................   EHW   H  
FB121 Trichloromonoffuoromethane ………………………… EHW   H  
See   FEF 207  2,4, 5‐Trichlorophenol......................................   EHW   AH  
See   FEP207  2,4, 6‐Trichlorophenol......................................   EHW   AH  
See   FE  207 2,4, 5‐Trichlorophenoxyacetic acid…………………………   EHW   BH+  
FB235   Tris (2, 3, ‐disbromopropyl) phosphate ………………… EHW   DH  
FB236   Trypan blue ………………………………………………………….. EHW   H+  
FB237   Uracil, 5‐[bis (2‐chloromethyl) amino]‐ ……………….. EHW   BH+  
FB237   Uracil mustard…………………………………………………….   EHW   BH+  
FA119   Vanadic acid, ammonium salt …………………………….. EHW   B  
FA120   Vanadium pentoxide ………………………………………….. EHW   B  
FA120   Vanadium (V) oxide ……………………………………………. EHW   B  
FB043   Vinyl chloride ………………………………………………………. EHW   DH+  
FA001 Warfarin ………………………………………………………………. EHW   A  
FB239   Xylene   …………………………………………………………………..EHW   C  
FA121 Zinc cyanide……………………………………………………….   EHW   C  
FA122   Zinc phosphide…………………………………………………   EHW   BR  
1.2 Moderately Hazardous/Dangerous Chemical Products  
FB187   Acetamide, N‐ethoxyphenyl)‐ ………………………………… DW   D+  
FB005   Acetamide, N‐9H fluoren‐2‐yl‐ ………………………………… DW  
FB112   Acetic acid, ethyl ester…………………………………………………DW   D1
FB214   Acetic acid, thallium (I) salt…………………………………………DW  
FB002   Acetone ……………………………………………………………………DW   D1
FB004   Acetophenone …………………………………………..   DE   D  
FB005   2‐Acetylaminofluorene ………………………………… DW  
FB150   Alanine, 3‐[p‐bis (2‐chloroethyl) amino] phenyl   DW   +  
FB328   2‐Amino‐l‐methyl benzene …………………………………….. DW   D+  
FB353   4‐Amino‐l‐methyl benzene ………………………………………..DW   D  
FB011   Amitrole …………………………………………………………………….DW   D+  
FB014   Auramine ……………………………………………………………. DW   +  
FB016   Benz [c] acridine …………………………………………………………DW   +  
FB016   3, 4‐Benzacridine …………………………………………………………DW   +  
FB014   Benzenamine, 4, 4‐carbonimidoyl bis (N,  
    N‐dimethyl‐ ……………………………………………………………………DW   +  
FB222   Benzanamine, 2‐methyl‐, hydrochloride …………………… DW   D+  
FB181   Benzenamine, 2‐methyl‐5‐nitro ……………………………………DW   D  
FB028   1, 2‐Benzenedicarboxylic acid, dibutyl ester …………………DW  
FB069   1, 2‐Benzenedicarboxylic acid, dibutyl ester  …………………DW   D  
FB088   1, 2‐Benzenedicarboxylic acid, diethyl ester …………………….DW  
FB102   1, 2‐Benzenedicarboxylic acid, dimethyl ester……………………DW  
FB107   1, 2‐Benzenedicarboxylic acid, di‐n‐octyl ester……………………..DW  
FB203   Benzene 1, 2‐methyl enedioxy‐4‐allyl‐ ………………………………….DW   D  
FB141 Benzene, 1, 2‐methyl endioxy ‐4‐propenyl‐ ……………………….. DW   D+  
FB090   Benzene, 1, 2‐methyl‐ enedioxy‐4‐propyl.....................................DW   D+  
FB234   Benzene, 1,3, 5‐trinitro‐ ……………………………………………………. DW   D  
FB202   1, 2‐Benzisothiazolin‐3‐one, 1, l‐dioxide, and salts……………………………………..   DW   +  
FB120   Benzo [j, k] floureno …………………………………………………………………………………… DW   D  
FB091   (1, l‐Biphenyl)‐4‐'diamine, 3, 3‐dimeth‐oxy‐......................................................   DW   D+  
FB244   Bis (dimethylthio carbomoyl) disulfide …………………………………………………………. DW   D  
FB028   Bis (2‐ethythoxyl) phthalate ………………………………………………………………………. DW  
FB172   1‐Butanamine, N‐butyl‐N‐nitroso‐ ……………………………………………………………….. DW   D+  
FB031   1‐Butanol............................................................................................................   DW   D1
FB159   2‐Butanone ……………………………………………………………………………………………………. DW   D1  
FB031   n‐Butyl alcohol...................................................................................................   DW   D1
FB136   Cacodylic acid ………………………………………………………………………………………………. DW   D  
FB215   Carbonic acid, dithallium (I) salt …………………………………………………………………….. DW  
FB051 Creocote …………………………………………………………………………………………………….. DW   D  
FB059   Daunomycin ………………………………………………………………………………………………….. DW   +  
FB221   Diminotoluene ………………………………………………………………………………………………… DW  
FB069   Dibutyl phthalate……………………………………………………………………………………………   DW   D  
FB192   3, 5‐Dichloro‐N‐(1, 1‐dimethyl‐2‐propynyl)  
Benzamide…………………………………………………………………………………………………….   DW  
FB108   1, 4‐Diethylene dioxide…………………………………………………………………………………   DW   D+  
FB086   N, N‐Diethylhdrazine…………………………………………………………………………………….   DW   *  
FB088   Diethyl phthalate ………………………………………………………………………………………… DW  
FB089   Dietylstilbestrol................................................................................................   DW   +  
FB148   1, 2‐Dihydro‐3‐6‐pyridizincdione ………………………………………………………………… DW   D  
FB090   Dihydrosafrole …………………………………………………………………………………………… DW   D  
FB091   3,3 Dimethoxybensidine ……………………………………………………………………………. DW   D+  
FB098   1, l‐Dimethylhydrazine ………………………………………………………………………………. DW   + 1  
FB101   2, 4‐Dimethylphenol ……………………………………………………………………………………. DW   D+  
FB102   Dimethyl phthalate ……………………………………………………………………………………. DW   ?  
FB107   Di‐n‐octyl phthalate………………………………………………………………………………………   DW   ?  
FB108   1, 4‐Dioxane…………………………………………………………………………………………………   DW   D+  
FB117   Ethane, 1, l‐oxybis …………………………………………………………………….. DW   D+  
FB218   Ethanethioamide ………………………………………………………………………………… DW   +  
FB173   Ethanol, 2, 2‐(nitrosoimino) bis …………………………………………………………. DW   +  
FB004   Ethanone, l‐phenyl‐ ……………………………………………………………………….. DW   D  
FB112   Ethyl acetate ……………………………………………………………………………….. DW   D  
FB113   Ethyl acrylate …………………………………………………………………………………. DW   DI  
FB238   Ethyl carbamate (urethane) ……………………………………………………………….. DW   +  
FB116   Ethylene thiourea …………………………………………………………………………… DW   D+  
FB117   Ethyl ether ……………………………………………………………………………………. DW   DI  
FB118   Ethyl methacrylate…………………………………………………………………………   DW   D  
FBl19   Ethyl metha nesulphonate……………………………………………………………   DW   +  
FB139   Ferric dextran ………………………………………………………………………………… DW   +  
FB120   Fluoranthene ………………………………………………………………………………… DW   D  
FB123   Formic acid ………………………………………………………………………………….. DW   DO  
FB124   Furan……………………………………………………………………………………………….   DW  
FB2l3   Furan, tetra hydro‐ ………………………………………………………………………. DW  
FB124   Furfuran ……………………………………………………………………………………… DW  
FB213   Furan, tetra hydro‐ ………………………………………………………………………… DW  
FB059   5, 12‐ Naphthacenedione, (8S‐cis) ‐8‐acety‐1O‐[(3‐amino‐2, 3,                                                                                         
6‐trideoxy‐alpha‐l‐ly; oxyl]‐7, 8, 9, 1O‐ tetrahydro‐6, 8,11 ‐  
trihydroxy‐l‐metoxy‐ …………………………………………………………………………. DW   +  
FB172   N‐Nitrosodi‐n‐butylamine……………………………………………………………….   DW   D+  
FB173   N‐Nitrosodiethanolamine ……………………………………………………………….. DW   +  
FB180   N‐Nitrosopyrrolidine ……………………………………………………………………. DW   D+  
FB181   5‐Nitro‐o‐toluidine ………………………………………………………………………… DW   D  
FB193   1,2, ‐Oxathiolane, 2, 2‐dioxide…………………………………………………………   DW   +  
FB182   Paraldehyde ………………………………………………………………………………. DW   DI  
FB186   1, 3‐Pentadiene……………………………………………………………………………..   DW   DI  
FB187   Phenacetin ……………………………………………………………………………….. DW   D*  
FB101   Phenol, 2, 4‐dimethyl‐ ……………………………………………………… DW   D  
FB137   1, 10‐(1, 2‐Phenylene) pyrene ……………………………………………… DW   *  
FB145   phosphoric acid, lead salt ………………………………………………… DW   *  
FB087   phopshorodithioc acid, O.O‐diethyl‐S‐methylester ………….. DW   ?  
FB192   Pronamide ……………………………………………………………………….. DW   ?  
FB193   1, 3‐Propane sultone …………………………………………………….. DW   *  
FB140   1‐Propanol, 2‐methyl‐ ……………………………………………………….. DW   DI  
FB002   2‐Propanone ………………………………………………………………….. DW   DI  
FB113   2‐Propenoic acid, ethyl ester……………………………………………   DW   DI  
FB118   2‐Propenoic acid, 2‐methyl‐, ethyl ester ……………………………. DW   I  
FB162   2‐Propenoic acid, 2‐methyl‐methyl ester ………………………. DW   DI  
FB234   Syn‐Trinitrobenzene …………………………………………………….. DW   DR  
FB182   1,3, 5‐Trioxane, 2, 4, 5‐trimethyl‐ …………………………………….. DW   DI  
FB200   Y ohimban‐16‐carboxylic acid, 11, 17‐di‐methoxy‐18‐                                                                                                             
(3, 4, 5,‐trimethoxy‐benzoy oxy]‐methyl ester ………. .  
       KEY  
*EHW....................................   Extremely Hazardous Waste  
DW........................................   Dangerous Waste  
X………………………………………… Toxic, Category X  
A ………………………………………. Toxic, Category A  
B …………………………………………. Toxic, Category B  
C …………………………………………….. Toxic, Category C  
D ………………………………………………. Toxic, Category D  
H ………………………………………………… Persistent Halogenated Hydrocarbon  
0............................................   Corrosive  
P ……………………………………………… Persistent, Polycyclic Hydrocarbon  
* ……………………………………………… IARC Animal or Human, Positive or suspected Carcinogen  
I............................................   Ignitable  
R ………………………………………………. Reactive  
EP………………………………………………………………………   Extraction Procedure Toxicity  
        Inconclusive
SCHEDULE 12
[Regulation 76 (1).]
2.0   Hazardous/Dangerous Waste Sources List (FAC 000‐000‐9904)  
2.1   Non‐Specific Sources  
Dangerous         Sources  
waste No.  
2.1.1 Generic  
FEF001    The following spent halogenated solvents used in degreasing: Tetrachloroethylene    
trichloroethylene chloride, 1, 1, l,‐trichloroethane, carbon tetrachloride, and chlorinated  
fluorocarbons; and sludges from the recovery of these solvents in degreasing operations (See  
footnote 1, below).  
FEF002     The following halogenated solvents: tetrachloroethylene, methylene chloride,      
trichloroethane, chlorobenzene, 1, 1, 2‐trichloro‐l, 2, 2, ‐trifluoroethane, ortho‐    
dichlorobenzene and trichlorofluoromethane; and the still bottoms from the recovery of  
these solvents (See footnote 1, below).  
FEF003     The following spent non‐halogenated solvents: xylene, acetone, ethyl acetate ethyl benzene,  
ethyl ether, methyl isobutyl ketone, n‐butyl alcohol, cyclohex a none and methanol; and the  
still bottoms from the recovery of these solvents.  
FEF004     The following spent non‐halogenated solvents: cresols and acrylic acid.  
FEF005     The following spent non‐halogenated solvents: Toluene, methyl ethyl ketone, carbon    
disulphide, isobutanol, pyridine, and the still bottoms from the recovery of these solvents.  
FEF006     Waste water treatment sludges from electro‐plating operations, except from the following  
processes: (1) sulphuric acid anodising of aluminium; (2) tin plating on carbon steel; (3) zinc  
plating (segregated basis) on carbon steel; (4) aluminium or zinc‐aluminium plating on    
carbon steel; (5) cleaning, stripping associated with tin, zinc and aluminium plating on carbon  
steel; and (6) chemical etching and milling of aluminium.  
FEF007     Spent cyanide plating bath solutions from electroplating operations.  
FEF008     Plating bath residues from the bottom of plating baths from electroplating operation where  
cyanides are in the process.  
FEF009     Spent stripping and cleaning bath solutions from electroplating operations where cyanides  
are used in the process.  
FEF010     Quenching bath residues from oil baths from metal heat treating operations where cyanides  
are used in the process.  
FEF011     Spent cyanide solutions from salt bath pot cleaning from metal heat treating operations.  
FEF012     Quenching waste water treatment sludges from metal heat‐treating operations where    
cyanides are used in the process.  
FEF020     Wastes (except waste water and spent carbon from hydrogen chloride purification), from the  
production or manufacturing (used as a reactant chemical intermediate or component in a  
formulating process) oftri‐or tetrachlorophenol, or of intermediates used to produce their  
pesticides derivatives. (This listing does not include wastes from the production of    
hexachlorophene from highly purified 2, 4, 5‐trichlorophenol). (See footnote 2, below).  
FEF021     Wastes (except waste water and spent carbon from hydrogen chloride purification) from the  
production or manufacturing use (as a reactant chemical intermediate or component in a  
formulating process) of pentachlorophenol, or of intermediates used to produce its    
derivatives (See footnote 2, below).  
FEF022     Wastes (except waste water and spent carbon from hydrogen chloride purification) from the  
manufacturing use (as a reactant, chemical intermediate, or component in a formulating  
process) oftetra‐penta‐, or hexachlorobenzenes under alkaline conditions (See footnote 2,  
below).  
FEF023     Wastes (except waste water and spent carbon from hydrogen chloride purification, from the  
production of materials on equipment previously used for the production or manufacturing  
use (as a rectant, chemical intermediate, or component in a formulating process) oftri‐and  
tetrachlorophenols (See footnote 2, below). This listing does not include wastes from    
equipment used only for the production or use of hexachlorophene from highly purified   
2,4,5 trichlorophenol).  
FEF024     Wastes, including but not limited to, distillation residues, heavy ends, tars, and reactor    
cleanout wastes from the production of chlorinated aliphatic hydrocarbons having carbon  
content from one to five, utilising free radical catalysed processes (See footnote 1, below).  
(This listing does  not include light ends spent filters and filter aids, spent dessicants, waste  
water, waste water treatment sludges, spent catalysts, and waste listed under specific    
sources, below).  
FEF026     Wastes (except waste water and spent carbon from hydrogen chloride purification from the  
production of materials on equipment previously used for the manufacturing use (as a    
reactant, chemical intermediate, or component in a formulating process of tetra‐penta or  
hexachlorobenzene under alkaline conditions (See footnote c, below).  
FEF027     Discarded unused formulations containing tri‐tetra‐ or pentachlorophenol or discharged  
formulations containing compounds derived from these cholorophenols (See footnote 2,  
below). (This listing does not include formulations containing hexachlorophene synthesised  
from prepurified 2, 4, 5‐trichloro‐pheno as the sole component).  
FEF028     Residues resulting from the incineration or thermal treatment of soil contaminated with non‐ 
specific sources wastes FEF027.  
2.2 Specific Sources  
    2.2.1 Wood Preservation  
FEK001   Bottom sediment sludge from the treatment of waste waters from wood preserving    
processes that use creosote and/or pentachlorophenol (See footnote 1, below).  
    2.2.2 Inorganic pigments  
FEK002     Waste water treatment sludge from the production of chrome yellow and orange pigments.  
FEK003   Waste water treatment sludge from the production of molybdate orange pigments.  
FEK004   Waste water treatment sludge from the production of zinc yellow pigments.  
FEK005   Waste water treatment sludge from the production of chrome green pigments.  
FEK006   Waste water treatment sludge from the production of oxide green pigments (anhydrous and  
hydrated).  
FEK007   Waste water treatment sludge from the production of iron blue pigments.  
FEK008  Oven residue from the production of chrome oxide green pigments.  
    2.2.3 Organic Chemicals  
FEK009         Distillation bottoms from the production of acetaldehyde from ethylene.  
FEKO 1 0        Distillation side cuts from the production of acetaldehyde from ethylene.  
FEKO 11    Bottom stream from the waste water stripper in the production of acrylonitrile.  
FEKO 13   Bottom stream from the acetonitrile column in the production of acrylonitrile.  
FEK014     Bottoms from the acetonitrile purification column in the production of acrylonitrile.  
FEK015     Still bottoms from the distillation of benzyl chloride (See footnote 1, below).  
FEK016     Heavy ends or distillation residues from the production of carbon tetrachloride (See footnote  
1, below).  
FEK017     Heavy ends (still bottoms) from the purification column in the production of epichlorohydrin  
(See footnote 1, below).  
FEK018     Heavy ends from the fractionation column in ethy1chloride production (See footnote 1,   
below).  
FEK019     Heavy ends from the distillation of ethylene dischloride in ethylene dichloride production  
(See footnote 1, below).  
FEK020     Heavy ends from the distillation of vinyl chloride in vinyl chloride monomer production (See  
footnote 1, below).  
FEK021    Aqueous spent antimony catalyst waste from fluoromethanes production (See footnote 1,  
below).  
FEK022     Distillation bottom tars from the production of phenollacetone from cumene.  
FEK023   Distillation light ends from the production of phthalie anhydride from naphthalene.  
FEK024   Distillation bottoms from the production of phthalic anhydride from naphthalene.  
FEK025   Distillation bottoms from the production of nitrobenzene by the nitration of  
benzene.  
FEK026   Stripping still tails from the production of methyl ethyl pyridines.  
FEK027   Centrifuge and distillation residues from toluene diisocyanate production.  
FEK028   Spent catalyst from the hydro chlorinator reactor in the production of 1, 1, I‐trichloroethane (See
footnote, below).  
FEK029   Waste from the product stream stripper in the production of 1, 1, I‐trichloroethane (See footnote 1,
below).  
FEK030   Column bottoms or heavy ends from the combined production of trichloroethylene and
perchloroethylene (See footnote 1, below).  
FEK083   Distillation bottoms from aniline production.  
FEK093   Distillation light ends from the production of phthalic anhydride from orthoxylene.  
FEK094   Distillation bottoms from the production of phthalic anhydride from orthoxylene.  
FEK095   Distillation bottoms from the production of 1, 1, 1 trichloroethane (See footnote 1 below).  
FEK096   Heavy ends from the heavy ends column from the production of 1, 1, 1  
trichloroethane (See footnote 1, below).  
FEK 1 03 Process residues from aniline extration from the production of aniline.  
FEK104   Combined waste water streams generated from nitobenzene/aniline production.  
FEK085   Distillation column bottoms from the production of chlorobenzenes (See footnote 1, below).  
FEK105   Separated aqueous stream from the reactor product washing step in the production of   chlorobenzenes
(See footnote 1, below).  
FEK111 Product wash waters from the production of dinitrosotoluene via nitration of toluene.  
FEK112   Reaction bye‐product water from the drying column in the production of toluenediamine via
hydrogenation of dinitrosotoluene.  
FEK113  Condensed liquid light from the purification oftoluenediamine in the production oftoluenediamine via
hydrogenation of dinitrotoluene.  
FEK114   Vicinals from the purification of toluenediamine in the production of toluenedianmine via
hydrogenation of dinitrotoluene.  
FEK115   Heat ends from the purification oftoluenediamine in the production of toluenediamine via
hydrogenation of dinitrotoluene.  
FEKl16   Organic condensate from the solvent recovery column in the production of toluene diisocyanate via
phosgenation oftoluenediamine (See footnote 1, below)  
2.2.3 Explosive  
FEK04   Waste water treatment sludges from the manufacturing and processing of explosives.  
FEK045   Spent carbon from the treatment of waste water containing explosive.  
FEK046   Waste water treatment sludges from the manufacturing formulation and loading of lead based   initiating
compounds.  
FEK047   Pink/red water from TNT operations.  
2.2.4 Inorganic Chemicals  
FEK071   Brine purification muds from the mercury cell process in chlorine production, where separately
prepurified brine is not used.  
FEK073   Chlorinated hydrocarbon waste from the purification step of the diaphragm cell process using   graphite
anodes in chlorine production (See footnote 1, below).  
FEK106   Waste water treatment sludge from the mercury cell process in chlorine production.  
2.2.5 Petroleum Refining  
FEK048   Dissolved Air Flotation (DAF) float from the petroleum refining industry.  
FEK049   Slop oil emulsion from the petroleum refining industry.  
FEK050   Heat exchanger bundle cleaning sludge from the petroleum refining industry.  
FEK051   API separator sludge from the petroleum refining industry.  
FEK052   Tank bottoms (leaded) from the petroleum refining industry.  
2.2.6 Iron and Steel  
FEK061   Emission control dust/sludge from the primary production of steel in electric furuance.  
FEK062   Spent pickle liquor generated by steel finishing operations of facilities within the iron and steel   industry
(SIC Codes 331 and 332).  
2.2.7 Pesticides  
FEK031   By‐product salts generated in the production of MSMA and cacodylic acid.  
FEK032   Waste water and scrub water from the chlorination of cyclopenatadiene in the production of
chlordane (See footnote 3, below).  
FEK033   Waste water and scrub water from the chlorination of cyclopenatadiene in the production of
chlordane (See footnote 3, below).  
FEK034   Filter solids from the filtration ofhexachlorocyclopentadiene in the production of chlordane (See  footnote
3, below).  
FEK097   Vacuum stripper discharge from the chlordane (See footnote 3, below).  
FEK035   Waste water treatment sludges generated in the production of creosote.  
FEK036   Still bottoms from toluene reclamation distiuation in the production of disulphoton.  
FEK037   Waste water treatment sludges from the production disulphoton.  
FEK038   Waste water from the washing and stripping of ph orate production (See footnote 3, below).  
FEK039   Filter cake from the filtration of diethyphosphorodithioic acid in the production of phorate (See   footnote
3, below).  
EK040   Waste water treatment sludge from the production of phorate production (See footnote 3, below).  
FEK041   Waste water sludge from the production of toxaphene (See footnote 3, below).  
FEK098  Untreated process waste water from the production to toxaphene (See footnote 3, below).  
FEK042   Heavy ends or distillation residues from the distillation oftetrachlorobenzene in  
the production of 2, 4, 5‐ T (See footnote 1, below).  
FEK043   2, 6‐Dichlorophenol waste from the production of 2, 4‐D (See footnote 1, below).  
FEK099  Untreated waste water from the production of2, 4‐D (See footnote 1, below).  
FEK123   Process waste water (including superuates, filterates, and waste waters) from the production of
ethylenebisdithiocarbamic acid and its salts.  
FEK124   Reactor vent scrubber from the production of enthylenebisdithiocarbamic and its salts.  
FEK125   Filteration, evaporation and centrifugation solids from the production of ethylenebisthiocarbamic
acid and its salts.  
FEK126   Baghouse dust and floor sweepings in milling and packaging operations from the production or
formulation of ethylenebisdithiocarbamic acid and its salt.  
2.2.8 Secondary Lead  
FEK069   Emission control dust/sludge from the secondary lead smelting.  
FEK100   Waste leaching solution from acid leaching of emission control dust/sludge from sec‐ondary lead
smelting.  
2.2.9 Veterinary Pharmaceuticals  
FEK084   Waste water treatment sludges during the production of veterinary pharmaceuticals from arsenic or
organo‐arsenic compounds.  
FEK101   Distillation tar residues from the distillation of aniline‐based compounds in the production of
veterinary pharmaceuticals from arsenic or organoasenic compounds.  
FEK102   Residue from the use of activated carbon for decolourisation in the production of veterinary
pharmaceutucals from arsenic or organo‐arsenic compounds.  
2.2.10 Ink Formulation  
FEK086   Solvent washes and sludges, caustic washes and sludges, or water washes and sludges from cleaning,
tubs and equipment used in the formulation of ink from pigments, driers, soaps, and stabilisers
containing chromium and lead.  
2.2.11 Coking  
FEK060   Ammonia still‐lime sludge from coking operations.  
FEK087   Decanter tank tar sludge from coking operations.  
NOTES‐  
1. These wastes contain or may contain halogenated hydrocarbons. Although 1.2 states that these   wastes
are DW, generators who know that their waste contains greater than one per cent of these   listed
halogenated hydrocarbons should designate their waste as EHW.  
2. For wastes listed with the dangerous waste numbers EF020, FEF021, FE022, FEF023, FEF026 or FE027
the quantity exclusions limit is 1 kg per month or per batch.  
3. These wastes contain or may contain X Category toxic constituents. Although section 1.2 states that
these wastes are DW generators who know that their waste contains greater than 0.1 per cent of
these listed toxic constituents should designate their waste EHW.
SCHEDULE 13
[Regulation 76 (1).]
4. Hazardous/Dangerous Waste Constituents List (FAC 000‐000‐9905).  
Acetonitrile (Ethanenitrile)  
Acetophznone (Ethanone l‐phenyl) ‐alpha (Acetonylbenzyl)‐4 hydroxycoumarin and                                                
salt (Warfarin).  
2‐Acetylaminofluorene (Acetamide, N‐9H‐fluoren‐2‐yl‐) Acetyl chloride (Ethanoyl Chloride)  
1‐Acetyl‐2‐thiourea (Acetamide, N‐(aminothioxomethyl‐Acrolein (2‐propenal) Aery lonitrile (2
Propenenitrile)  
Aflatoxins  
Aldrin (1, 2, 3, 4, 10, 10‐Hexachloro‐l, 4, 4a, 5, 8, 8a, 8b‐ hexahydro‐endo, exo‐l, 4, 5,  
8‐ Dia‐methanonaphthalene)  
Allyl alcohol (2‐Propen ‐1‐01) Aluminum phoshide  
4‐Aminobiphenyl ([1,1 ',‐Bpihenyl]‐4 amine)  
6‐Amino‐l, la, 2,8, 8a, 8b‐hexahydro‐8‐ (hydroxymethyl)‐8a‐methoxy‐5‐methyl‐Carbamatae azirino [2, 3': 3,4]
pyrrolo [1, 2,‐ajindole‐4, 7‐dione, (ester) Mitomysin C) (Azirino [2, 3' : 3, 4] pyrrolo (1, 2‐a) indole‐4, 7 ‐dione, 6‐
amino‐8)  
Barium and Compounds, N.O.S.*  
Barium Cyanide  
Benz [c] acridine (3, 4‐Benzacridine)  
Benz [a] anthracene (1 2‐Benzanthracene) Benzene (Cyclohexatrine)  
Benzenearsonic acid (Arsonic acid, phenyl‐) Benzene, 2‐amino‐l‐methyl (0‐ Toluidine) Benzene, 4‐amino‐l‐methyl
(p‐Toluidine) Benzene, dichloromethyl‐ (Benzal Chloride) Benzenethoil (Thiopheno)  
Beneidine ([1, 1' Biphenyl] ‐4, 4' diamine) Benzol [b] flouranthene (2, 3‐ Benzofiuoranthene) Benzo [j] fluoranthene
(7, 8‐Benzofluoranthene) Benzo [a] pyrene (3, 4‐ Benzoplyrene)  
p‐ Benzoquinone (1, 4‐Cyclohexadiennedione) Benzotrichloride (Benzene, trichloromethyl‐) Benzyl chloride
(Benzene, chloromethyl)‐Beryllium and compounds, N.O.S.*  
Bis (2‐Chloroethoxy) Methane (Ethane. 1, liz methylenebis (oxy) [bis [2chloro‐D Bis (2‐Chloroethyl ether (Ethane, 1.
1 liz oxybis [2‐chloro‐l D  
N, N ‐ Bis (2‐chloroethyl) ‐2 napthylamine (Chlomaphazine)  
Bis (2 Chloroisopropphyl) ether (propane, 2, 2l1z oxybis [2‐chloro‐ D Bis (chloromethyl) ether (Methane, oxybis
[chloro‐]  
Bis 2‐ethylthexyl) phthalate (1, 2‐Benzenedicarboxylic acid bis (2‐ethylexyl) ester) Bromoacetone (2‐Propanone, l‐
bromo‐)  
Bromomethane (Methyl bromide)  
4‐Bromophenyl phenyl ether (Benzene, l‐bromo‐4lphenoxy‐) Brucine (Strychnidin 10 one, 2, 3,‐dimethoxy‐)  
2‐Butanone peroxide (Methyl ethyl ketone, pro xi de  
Butyl benzyl phthala (1 2‐Benzenedicarboxylic acid, butyl phenylmethyl ester) 2‐sec‐Butyl‐4, 6‐dinitrophenol
(DNBP) (Phenol, 2, 4‐dinitro‐6‐(1‐methylpropy‐) Cadmium and compounds, N.O.S. *  
Calcium chromate (Chromic acid, calcium salt) Calcium cyanide  
Carbon disulphide (Carbon bisulphide) Carbon oxyfluoride (carbonyl fluoride) Chloral (Acetaldehyde, trichloro‐)
Chloramucil (Butanic acid 4 [bis (2 Chloroethyl) amino] benzene‐)  
Chlordane (alpha and gamma isomers) 4, 7,‐ Methanoindan, 1, 2, 4, 5, 6, 8, 8‐octachloro                                                    
‐3, 4, 7, 7a‐tetrahdro‐) (alpha and gamma isomers)  
Chlorinated benzenes, N.O.S. * Chlorinated ethane, N.O.S. *  
Chlorinated fluorocarbons, N.O.S. * Chlorinated naphthalene, N.O.S. * Chlorinated phenol, N.O.S. *
Chloroacetaldehyde (Acetaldehyde, chloro Chloroalkyl ether, N.O.S. *  
Chloroaniline (Benzenamine, 4‐chlor‐)  
Chlorobenzene (Benzene, Chloro‐)  
Chlorobenilate (Benzeneacetic acid, 4‐chloro‐alpha‐ (4 chlorophenyl) alpha hydroxy, ethylester)
2‐Chloro‐l, 3‐butadiene  
p‐Chloro‐m‐cresol (Phenol, 4‐Chloro‐3‐methyl)  
1‐Chloro 2 3‐epoxypropane (Oxirane, 2‐(chloromethyl‐)  
2‐Chloroethyl vinyl ether (Ethene, (2 chloro‐ethoxy)‐) Chloroform (Methane, trichloro‐)  
Chloromathane (Methyl, chloride)  
Chloromethyl methyl ether (methane, chloromethoxy‐)
2‐Chloronaphthalene (Napthalene, betachoro‐) 2‐Chlorophenol (Phenol, o‐chloro‐)  
1‐( o‐Chlorophenyl) thiourea (Thiourea, (2‐chlorophenyl)‐)  
3‐Chloropropene  
3‐Chloropropionitrile (Propanenitrile, 3‐chloro‐) Chromium and compounds, N.O.S. *  
Chrysene (1, 2‐Benzphenanthrene)  
Citrus red No.2 (2‐Naphthol, 1‐[(2, 5‐dimethoxyphenyl) azol)‐] Coaltars  
Copper cyanide  
Creosote (Creosote, wood)  
Cresols (Cresylic acid) Phenol, methyl‐) Crotonaldehyde (2‐Butenal)  
Cyanides (soluble salts and complexes), N.O.S.*  
Cyanogen (Ethanedinitrile)  
Cyanogen bromide (Bromine cyanide)  
Cyanogen chloride (Chlorine cyanide)  
Cyasin (beta‐D‐Glucopyranoside, (methyl‐ONN‐azoxy) methyl‐)  
2‐Cyclohexyl‐4‐6‐dinitrophenol (Phenol, 2‐cyclohexyl‐4, 6‐dinitro‐) Cyclophosphamide (2H ‐1, 3, 2‐)  
Oxazaphosphorine, [bis (2‐chloroethyl) amino‐] tetrahydro, 2‐oxide)  
Daunomycin   (5, 12‐ Napthacenedione,  (8S‐cis )‐8‐acetyl‐l 0‐[(3‐amino‐2,   3,  
6‐ trideoxy )‐alpha‐ L‐l yxo‐ hexopyranosy 1) oxy]‐ 7, 8, 9, 10‐ tetrahydro‐6, 8, 11‐ trihydroxy‐l‐ methxy ‐ )  
DDD (Dichlorodiphenyldichloroethane) (Ethane, 1, 1‐dichloro‐2, 2‐bis (p‐chloro‐phenyl)‐)  
DDE (Ethylene, 1, l‐dichloro‐2, 2‐bis (4‐chlorophenyl)‐)  
DDT (Dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane) (Ethane 1, 1, l‐trichloro‐2‐2‐ bis (p‐chloro
‐phenyl)‐) Diallate (S‐(2, 3‐dichloroallyl) diisopropylthiocarbamate)  
Dibenz [a, h] acridine (1, 2, 5, 6,‐Dibenzacridine)  
Dibenz [a, j] acridine (1, 2, 7, 8‐ Dibenzacridine)  
Dibenz [a, h] anthracene (1, 2, 5, 6‐Dibenzanthracene)  
7H‐Dibenzyl [c, g] carbazole (3, 4, 5, 6 ‐Dibenzcarbazole)  
Dibenzo [a, e] pyrene (1, 2, 4, 5‐Dibenzpyrene)  
Dibenzo [a, h] pyrene (1, 2, 5, 6‐Dibenzpyrene)  
Dibenzo [a, i] pyrene (1, 2, 7, 8‐Dibenzpyrene)  
1, 2‐ Dibromo‐ 3 ‐choropropane (Propane, 2‐dibromo‐ 3 ‐chloro‐ )
Dibenzo [a, i] pyrene (1, 2, 7, 8‐Dibenzyprene)  
1, 2‐Dibromoethane (Ethylene dibromide)  
Dibromomethane (Methylene bromide)  
Di‐n‐butyl phthalate (1‐2‐Benzenedicarboxylic acid, dibutyl ester)
o‐ Dichlorobenzene (Benzene, 1, 2‐dichloro‐)  
m‐Dichlorobenzene (Benzene, 1, 3‐dichloro‐)  
p‐ Dichlorobenzene (Benzene, 1, 4‐dichloro‐)  
Dichlorobenzene, N.O.S. * (Benzene, dichloro‐, N.O.S. *  
3, 3‐Dichlorobenzidine ([1, l‐Biphenyl]‐4, 4'‐diamine, 3, 3‐dichloro‐) 1, 4‐Dichloro‐2‐butene (2‐Butene, 1, 4‐Butene,
1, 4‐dichloro‐) Dichlorodifluoromethane (Methane, dichlorodifluoro‐)  
1, l‐Dichloroethane (Ethylidene dichloride) trans‐l, 2‐Dichloroethene (1, 2‐Dichlo‐roethlene) Dichlo  
roethylene, N.O.S. * (Ethene, dichloro‐, N.O.S.  
1, 1‐ Dichloroethy lene (Ethene, 1, l‐dichloro‐)  
Dichloromethane (Methylene chloride)  
2, 4‐ Dichlorophenol (Phenol, 2, 4‐dichloro‐) 2, 6‐ Dichlorophenol (Phenol, 2, 6‐dichloro)  
2, 4‐Dichlorophenoxyacetic acid (2, 4‐D), salts and esters (Acetic acid, 2, 4‐ dichloro‐  
phenoxy‐, salts and esters)                                                                                                                                                                         
Dichorophenylarsine (Phenyl dichloroarsine)                                                                                                                       
Dichloropropane, N.O.S. * (Propane, dichloro‐, N.O.S. *) 1, 2‐                                                                                  
Dichloropropene (Propylene dichloride) Dichloropropanol, N.O.S. * (Propanol, dichloro‐, N.O.S. *)
Dichloropropene, N.O.S. * (Propane, dichloro, N.O.S. *)  
1, 3 ‐ Dichloropropene, (1‐ Propene, 1, 3 ‐dichloro‐ )  
Dieldrine (1, 2,3,4,10, 10‐hexachloro‐6, 7‐epoxy‐ 1,4, 4a, 5, 6, 7, 8, 8a‐octa hydro‐endo, exo‐ 1,  
4: 5, 8‐Dimethanonanaphthalene)  
1,2: 3, 4‐Diepoxybutane (2, 2l1z‐Bioxirane)
Diethylarsine (Arsine, diethyl‐)  
N, N‐Diethyhlydrazine (Hydrazine, 1, 2‐diethyl)  
0, O‐Diethyl S‐methyl ester of phosphorodithioic acid (Phosphorodithioic acid, 0, O
‐diethyl S‐methyl ester 0, O‐Diethylphosphoric acid, O‐p‐nitrophenyl ester (Phosphoric acid, diethyl p‐nitrophenyl
ester)  
Diethyl phthalate (1, 2‐Benzennedicarboxylic acid, diethyl ester)  
0, O‐Diethyl 0‐2‐pyraxinyl phosphorothioate (Phosphorothioic acid, 0, O‐diethyl 0 pyrazinyl ester  
Diethylstilbesterol (4,4' ‐Stilbenediol, alpha, alpha‐diethyl bis (dihydrogen phosphate, (E)‐) Dihdrosafrole (Benzene,
1, 2‐methylenedioxy‐4‐propyl‐]  
         3‐4‐ Dihydroxy‐alpha‐(methylamino) methyl benzyl   alcohol   (1‐2‐benzendiol, 4‐[1‐hydroxy‐2‐(methylamino)
ethyl‐)  
Diisoprophyfluorophosphate (DFP) (Phosphorofluoride acid, bis (1‐methylethyl) ester)  
Dimethoate (Phosphorodithioic acid, 0, 0‐ dimethyl S‐[‐methylamino)‐2oxocthyl) ester
3, 31
/2Dimethoxybenzidine/] 1, lllz‐Biphenyl)‐4, 4l1z dimemine, 3‐3 dimethoxy‐)                                                                   
p‐Dimethylaminoazobenene (Benzenamine, N, N‐dimethyl‐4‐(phenylazo)‐)  
7, 12‐Dimethylbenz [a] anthracene (1, 2‐ Benzanthracene, 7, l2‐dimethyl‐)  
3, 31
/2 Dimethylbenzidine ([1, 1 liz‐Biphenyl] ‐4, 4l1z diamine, 3, 3l1z‐dimethyl‐)  
Dimethylcarbamoyl chloride (Carbamoyl chloride, dimethyl‐)  
1, 1‐Dimethylhydrazine (Hydrazine, 1. l‐dimethyl‐)  
1, 2‐Dimethylhydrazine (Hydrazine, 1, 2‐dimethyl‐)  
3, 3‐Dimethyl‐l(methylthio)‐2‐butanone, O‐](methylamino) carbonyl]oxine (Thiofanox) alpha,                                                
alpha‐ Dimethylphenethylamine  
(Ethanamine, 1, l‐dimethyl‐2‐phenyl)  
2 ,4‐Dimethylphenol (Phenol, 2, 4‐dimethyl‐)  
Dimethyl phthalate (1, 2‐Benzenedicarboxylic, acid, dimethyl ester)
Dimethyl sulfate (Sulphuric acid, dimethyl ester)  
Dinitrobenzene, N.O.S. * (Benzene, dinitro‐, N.O.S. *  
4, 6‐Dinitro‐o‐cresol and salts (Phenol, 2, 4‐dinitro‐6‐methyl‐, and salts)  
2, 4 Dinitro‐o‐cresol and salts (Phenol, 2, 4‐dinitro‐)  
2, 4‐ Dinitrotoluene (Benzen, l‐methyl‐2‐4‐dinitro‐)  
2, 6‐Dinitrotoluene (Benzene, l‐methyl‐2, 6‐dintro‐)  
Di‐n‐octyl phthalate (1, 2‐Benzenedicarbonzylic acid, Dioctyl ester)
1, 4‐Dioxane (1, 4‐Diethylene oxide)  
Diphenylamine (Benzenamine, N‐Phenyl‐)  
1, 2‐Diphenylhydrazine, Hydaazine 1,2‐ diphendyl‐)
Di‐n‐propylnitrosamine (N ‐ Nitroso‐di‐n‐propylamine)  
Disulphoton (0, O‐diethyl S‐[2‐(ethylthio) ethyl] phosphorodithioate)
2, 4‐ Dithiobiuret (Thioimidodicarbonic diamide)  
Endosulphan (5‐Nobomene, 2, 3‐dimethanol,  
1,4,5,6, 7, 7‐hexachloro‐, cyclic sulphite)  
Edrin and metabolites (1, 2, 3, 4, 10, 10‐hexachloro‐6, 7‐epoxy‐l, 4 4a, 5, 6, 7, 8, 8a‐ 
octahydro‐endo, endo‐l, 4 : 5, 8‐ dimethanonaphthalene, and metabolites)  
Ethyl carbamate (Urethan) (Carbamic acid, ethyl ester)  
Ethyl cyanide (propanenitrile)  
Ethylenebisdithiocarbamic acid, salts and esters (1, 2‐Ethanediylbiscarbamodithioic acid,
salts and esters  
Ethyleneimine(Aziridine)  
Ethlene oxide (Oxirane) Ethylenethiourea (2‐ Imidazo‐idinithione)  
Ethymethacrylate (2‐Propenoic acid, 2‐methyl‐, ethyl ester)
Ethy lmethanesulphonate  
(Methanesulphonic acid, ethyl ester)  
Fluorine  
Fluoranthene (Benzo [j, k] fluorene  
2‐ Fluoroacetamide (Acetamide, 2‐ fluoro‐)  
Fluoroactic acid, sodium salt (Acetic acid, fluorine, sodium salt)
Formaldehyde (Methylene oxide)  
Formic acid (Methanoic acid)  
Glycidylaldehyde (1‐Propanol‐2‐3‐epoxy)  
Halomethane, N.O.S. *  
Heptachlor (4, 7‐ Methano‐ lH‐ideno, 1,2,5,6, 7, 8, 8‐heptachloro‐3a, 4, 7, 7a‐ 
tetrahydro‐)                                                                                                                                                                                        
Heptachlor epoxide (alpha, beta, and gamma islmers) (4, 7‐Methano‐1 H‐indeni 1, 4, 5, 6,                                                                     
7, 8, 8‐heptachloro‐2, 3‐epoxy‐3a, 4, 7, 7‐ tetrachydro‐, alpha beta, and gamma isomers  
Hexachlorobenzene (Benzene, hexachloro‐)                                                                                                        
Hexachlorobutadiene (1, 3‐Butadiene, 1, 1,2,3,4, 4‐hexachloro‐)                                                                             
Hexachlorocyclohexane (all isomers) (Lindane and isomers)                                                                             
Hexachlorocylopentadiene (1,3‐ Cyclopentadiene, 1,2,3,4,5, 5‐hexachloro‐)                                                       
Hexachlorodibenzo‐ p‐dioxins                                                                                                                                                                             
Hexachloroethane (Ethane, 1, 1, 1, 2, 2, 2, ‐ hexachloro‐ )                                                                                                                  
1,2,3,4, 10, 10‐Hexachloro‐l, 4, 4a, 5, 8, 8a‐dimethanonphthalene                                                                                                                       
Hexachlorohexahydro‐endo, endo‐ dimethanonaphthalene)                                                                                                  
Hexachlorophene (2, 2' ‐Methylenebis (3, 4, 6‐trichlorophenol)                                                                                    
Hexachloropropene (1‐ Propene, 1, 1, 2, 3, 3, 3,‐ hexachloro‐ )                                                                                                
Hexaethyl tetraphosphate (Tetraphosphoric acid, hexaethyl ester)                                                                                       
Hydrazine (Diamine)  
Hydrocyanic acid (Hydrogen cyanide)
Hydrofluoric acid (Hydrogen fluoride) Hydrogen surphide (Sulphur hydride)
Hydroxydimethylarsine oxide (Cacodylic acid)  
Indeno (1, 2, 3‐cd) pyrene (1, 10‐(1,2‐ phenylene) pyrene)
Iodomethane (methyl iodide)  
Iron Dextran (Ferric dextran)  
Isocyanic acid, methyl ester (Methylisoyanate)
Isobutyl alcohol (1‐Propanol, 2‐methyl‐)  
Isosafrole (Benzene, 1, 2‐methylenedioxy‐4‐allyl‐)  
Kepone (Decachloroctahydro‐l, 3, 4,‐Methano‐2H‐Cyclobuta (cd) pentalen‐2‐one)  
Lasiocarpine (2‐Butenoic acid, 2‐methyl‐, 7‐ [(2, 3‐dihydroxyethyl)‐3methyl‐oxobutoxy)                                                      
methyl]‐2, 3, 5, 7a‐tetrahydro‐1H‐pyrrolizin‐yl ester)  
Lead and compounds, N.O.S. *  
Lead acetate (Acetic acid, lead salt)  
Lead phosphate (Phosphoric acid, lead salt)  
Lead sub acetate (Lead, bis (acetato‐O) tetrahydroxytri‐)
Maleic anhydride (2, 5‐Furandione)  
Maleic hydrazide (1, 2‐Dihydro‐3, 6‐ pyridazinedione)
Malononoitrile (Propanedinirile)  
Melphalan (Alanine, 3‐[p‐bis (2‐chloroethyl) amino] phenyl‐ L‐)  
Mercury Fulminate (Fulminic acid, mercury salt)  
Mercury and compounds, N.O.S. *  
Methacrylonitrile (2‐Propenenitrile, 2‐methyl‐)  
Methanethiol (Thiomethanol)  
Methapyrilene (Pyridine, 2‐[2‐dimethylamino) ethyl]‐2‐ethenylmino‐)
Metholonyl (Acetimidic acid, N [(mehthylcarbamoyl) oxy] thio‐, methyl ester  
Methoxychlor (Ethane, 1, 1, l‐trichloro‐2, 2‐ bis (p‐methoxyphenyl)‐)  
2‐Methylaziridine (1, 2‐Propylenimine)  
3‐ Methylchloranthrene (Benz)(J) aceanthrylene, 1, 2‐dihydro‐3‐methyl‐)
Methyl chlorocarbonate (Carbanocloridic acid, methyl ester)  
4, 4' ‐ Methy lenebis (2‐chloroaniline)  
(Benzenamine, 4, 4' ‐methylenebis‐(2‐chloro‐)  
Methyl ethyl ketone (MEK) 2‐Butanone)  
Methyl hydrazine (Hydrazine, methyl‐)  
2‐Methyllactonitrile (Propanenitrile, 2‐hydroxy‐2‐methyl‐)  
Methyl methacrylate (2‐Propenoic acid, 2‐ methyl‐, methyl ester)
Methyl methanesulphonate (Methanesulphonic acid, methyl ester)  
2‐Methyl‐2‐(methylithio)   propionaldehyde‐o‐(methycarbonyl) oxime  (Prop anal, 2‐ 
methyl‐2(methythio)‐0‐ (Methylamino) carbonyl) oxime)  
N‐methyl‐N' ‐nitro‐ N‐nitrosoguandine  
(Guanidine N‐nitros‐N‐methyl‐NlIz nitro‐)  
Methyl parathion (0, O‐dimethylO‐( 4 nitrophenyl) phosphorothioate
Methylthiouracil (4‐1 1 1‐Pyrimidinone, 2, 3‐ dihydro‐6‐methyl‐2‐thioxo‐)  
Mustard gas (Sulphide, bis (2‐chloroethyl‐)  
Naphthalene  
1, 4‐Naphthoquinone (1, 4‐Naphthaneledione)  
1‐ N apththylamine (alpha‐ N aphthlamine)  
2‐ N aphthy lamine (beta‐ N aphthy lamine)  
Nickel and compounds, N.O.S. *  
Nickel carbonyl (Nickel tetracarbonyl)  
Nickel cyanide (nickel (II) cyanide)  
Nicotine and salts, Pyridine, (S)‐3‐(1‐methyl‐ 2‐pyrrolidinyl‐, and salts)  
Nitric oxide (Nitrogen (II) axide)  
p‐Nitroaniline Benzenamine, 4‐nitro‐) Nitrobenzine (Bezene, nitro‐)  
Nitrogen dioxide (Nitrogen (IV) oxide)  
Nitrogen mustard and hydrochloride salt (Ethanamine, 2‐chloro‐ N‐(2‐chloroethyl)
‐N‐methyl‐ and hydrochloride salt)  
Nitrogen mustard N‐oxide and hydrochloride salt (Ethanamine, 2‐chloro‐, N‐(2‐                                                                      
chlroethyl)‐N‐methyl,‐ and hydrocholoride salt)  
Nitroglycerine (1, 2, 3,‐Propanetriol, trinitrate)  
4‐ Nitrohenol Phenol, 4‐dinitro‐) 4‐Nitroquinoline‐I‐oxide (Quinoline,  
4‐nitro‐l‐oxide‐) Nitrosamine, N.O.S. *  
N‐Nitrosodi‐n‐butylamine (1‐Butanamine, N‐bntyl‐N‐nitroso‐)  
N ‐ Nitrosodiethanolamine (Ethanol, 2, 2‐ (nitrosoimino) bis‐)  
N‐Nitrosodiethylamine (Ethanamine N‐Ethyl‐ N‐nitroso‐)  
N ‐ Nitrosodimethylamine  
(Dimethylnitrosamine)  
N‐Nitroso‐N‐ethylurea (Carbamide, N‐ethyl‐ N‐nitroso‐)  
N‐Nitrosomethylethylamine (Ethanamine, N‐methyl‐N‐nitroso‐)
N‐Nitroso‐N‐methylurca (Carbamide,) N‐methyl‐N‐nitroso‐)
N‐Nitroso‐N‐methyluthane (Carbamic acid, methylnitroso‐, ethyl ester)  
N‐Nitrosomethyl‐virylamine (Ethenamine, N‐methyl‐N‐nitroso)
N‐Nitrosomorpholine (Morpho line, N‐nitroso‐)  
N‐Nitrosonomicotine (Nomicotine, N‐nitroso‐)  
N ‐ Nitrosopiperidine (Pyridine, hexahydro‐, N ‐nitroso‐ )
Nitrosopyrolidine (Pyrrole, tetrahydro‐,  
N‐nitroso‐) Nitrosopyrrolidine (pyrrole, tetrahydro, N‐nitroso‐  
N ‐ Nitrososacrosine (Sarcosine, N ‐nitroso‐)  
5‐Nitro‐o‐toludine (Benzenamine, 2‐methyl‐5‐ nitro‐)
Isobutyl alcohol (1‐Propanol, 2‐methyl‐)  
Isosafrole (Benzene, 1, 2‐methylenedioxy‐4‐allyl‐)  
Kepone (Decachloroctahydro‐l, 3, 4,‐Methano‐2H‐Cyclobuta [cd] pentalen‐2‐one)  
Lasiocarpine (2‐Butenoic acid, 2‐methyl‐,7‐ [2, 3‐dihydroxyethyl)‐3 methyl‐l‐ oxobuto‐                                                                  
toxy) methyl]‐2, 3, 5, 7 atetrahydro‐lH‐pyrrolizin‐yl ester)  
Lead and compounds, N.O.S.  
Lead acetate (Acetic acid, lead salt)  
Lead phosphate (Phosphoric acid, lead salt)  
Lead sub acetate (Lead, bis (acetato‐O) tetrahydroxytri‐)
Maleic anhydride (2, 5‐ Furandione)  
Maleic hydrazide (1, 2‐ Dihydro‐3, 6‐pyridazinedione)
Malonoitrile (Propanedinitrile)  
Melphalan (Alanine, 3‐[p‐bis (2‐chlorosthyl) amino] phenyl‐L‐)  
Mercury Fulminate (Fulminic acid, mercury salt)  
Mercury and compounds N.O.S.  
Methacrylonitrile (2‐Propenenitrile, 2‐methyl‐)
Methanethiol (Thiomethanol)  
Methapyrilene (Pyridine, 2‐[2‐ dimethylamino) ethyl]‐2‐thenylamino‐)
Metholonyl (Acetimidic acid, N‐ [(methylcarbamoyl) oxy] thio‐, methyl ester Methoxychlor (Ethane, 1, 1, l‐
trichloro‐2, 2‐bis (p‐methoxyphenyl)‐)  
2‐Methylaziridine (1, 2‐Propylenimine)  
3‐Methylcholanthrene (Benz [j] aceanthrylene, 1, 2‐dihydro‐3‐methyl‐)
Methyl chlorocarbonate (Carbanochloridic acid, methyl ester)  
4, 4,‐Methylenebis (2‐chloroaniline) (Benzenamine, 4, 4‐methylenebis‐(2‐chloro‐)
Methyl ethyl ketone (MEK) (2‐Butanone)  
Methyl hydrazine (Hydraxine, methyl‐)  
2‐Methylactonitrile (Propanenitrile, 2‐hydroxy‐2‐methyl‐)  
Methyl methacrylate (2‐Propenoic acid, 2‐methyl‐methyl ester)  
Methyl methanesulphonate (Methanesulphonic acid, methyl ester)  
2‐Methyl‐2‐(methylthio)   propionaldehyde‐o‐ (methycarbonyl) oxime (Prop anal, 2                                                                       
methyl‐2(methylthio)‐0‐ [(methylamino) carbonyl] oxime)  
N ‐ Methy 1‐ N ‐nitro‐ N ‐nitro s oguanidine (Guanidine, N ‐nitros‐ N ‐methyl‐ Nianitro‐ 
Methyl parathion (0, O‐dimethyl 0‐(4 nitrophenyl phosphorothioate  
Methylthiouracil (4‐1H‐Pyrimidinone, 2, 3‐ dihydro‐6‐methyl‐2‐thioxo‐ 
Mustard gas (Sulphide, bis (2‐chloroethyl)‐  
Naphthalene  
1, 4‐ Naphthoquinone (1,4‐ N aphthanclenedione)
1‐Naphthylamine (alpha‐Naphthylamine)  
2‐ N aphthy lamine (beta‐ N aphthy lamine)
1‐Naphthy12‐thiourea (Thiourea, l‐naphthalenyl‐)  
Nickel and compounds, N.O.S. *  
Nickel carbonyl (Nickel tetracarbonyl)  
Nickel cyanide (nickel (II) cyanide)  
Nicotine and salts, Pyridine, (S)‐3‐(1‐methyl‐2‐pyrrolidinyl)‐, and salts)
Nitric oxide (Nitrogen (II) oxide  
P‐Nitroaniline Benzenamine, 4‐nitro‐)  
Nitrobenzene (Benzene, nitro‐)  
Nitrogen dioxide (Nitrogen (Nitrogen (IV) oxide)  
Nitrogen mustard and hydrochloride salt (Ethanamine, 2‐chloro‐, N‐(2‐cloroethyl)‐ 
N‐methyl‐, and hydrochloride salt  
Nitrogen mustard N‐Oxide and hydrochloride salt (Ethaanamine, 2‐chloro‐, N‐(2‐                                                          
chloroethyl) N‐methyl‐, and hydrochloride salt)
Nitroglycerine (1, 2, 3‐Propanetriol, trinitrate)
4‐ Nitrohenl (Phenol, 4‐dinitro‐)  
4‐ Nitroquinoline‐ I ‐oxide (Quinoline, 4‐nitro‐l‐oxide‐)  
Nitrosamine, N.O.S.  
N‐Nitrosodi‐n‐butylamine (1‐Butanamine, N‐butyl‐N‐nitroso‐)
N‐Nitrosodiethanolamine (Ethanamine, N‐ thyl‐N‐nitroso‐)  
N ‐ Nitrosodimethylamine (Dimethylnitrosamine)  
N‐Nitroso‐N‐ethylurea (Carbamide, N‐ethyl‐ N‐nitroso‐)  
N‐Nitrosodiethanolamine (Ethanol, 2, 2‐ ((nitrosoimino) bis‐)  
N ‐ Nitrosodimethylamine (Dimethylnitrosamine)
N‐Nitrosomethylethylaminethylethylamine (Ethanamine, N‐methyl‐N‐nitroso‐)  
N‐Nitroso‐N‐methylurea (Carbamide, N‐methyl‐N‐nitroso‐)
N‐Nitroso‐N‐methylurethane (Carbamic acid, methylnitroso‐, ethyl ester)
N‐Nitrosomethyl‐vinylamine (thenemine, N‐methyl‐N‐nitroso)  
N ‐ Nitrosomorpholine (orphonline, N ‐nitroso‐)  
N‐Nitrosonomicotine (Nomicotine, N‐nitroso‐)  
N ‐ Nitrosopiperidine (Pyridine, hexahydro‐, N ‐nitroso‐ )
Nitrosophrolidine (Pyrrole, tetrahydro‐, N‐nitroso‐)
Nitrosopyrrolidine (Pyrrole, tetrahydro‐, N‐nitroso‐  
    N‐ Nitrososacrosine (arcosine, N‐nitroso‐) 5‐ Nitro‐o‐tol dine (Benzenamine, 2‐ 2‐methyl‐                                                                  
5‐ nitro‐)  
    Octamethylpyrophosphoramide (Disphosphoramide, octamethyl‐)  
Osmium tetroxide (Osmium (VII) oxide)  
7‐0cabicyclo [2,2, 1] heptane‐2, 3‐dicarbonxylic acid (Enodothal)  
Paraldehyde (1, 3, 5‐ Trioxane, 2, 4, 6‐triethyl)‐  
Parathion (Phosphorothioc acid, 0 O‐diethyl O‐(P‐nitrophenyl ester
Pentachlorobenzene (Benzene, pentachloro‐)  
P enthachlorodibenzo‐ p‐dioxins  
Pentachlorodibenzofurans  
Penthachloroethane (Ethane, pentachloro‐)
Pentachloronitrobenzene (PCNB) (Benzene, pentachloronitro‐)
Pentachlorophenol (Phenol, pentachloro‐)  
Phenacetin (Acetamide, N‐( 4‐ethoxyphenyl)‐)  
Phenol (Benzene, hydroxy‐)  
Phenylenediamine (Benzenediamine)  
Phenylmercury acetate (mercury, acetatophenyl‐)  
N‐Phenylthourea (Thiourea, phenyl‐) Phosgene (Carbonyl chloride)
Phosphine (Hydrogen phosphide)  
Phosphrodichioic acid, 0, O‐diethyl S‐[(ethylthio) methyl] ester (Phorate)  
Phosphorothioic acid, 0, O‐dimethyl O‐[p‐(dimethlamino) sulphonyl) phenyl] ester                                                   
(camphur)
Phthalic acid esters, N.O.S* (Benzene, 1, 2‐dicarboxylic acid, esters, N.O.S.*  
Phthalic anhydride (1, 2‐ Benzenedicarboxylic acid anhydride)  
2‐Picoline (Pyridine, 2‐methyl‐)  
Polychlorinated biphenyl, N.O.S. *  
Potassium cyanide  
Potassium silver cyanide (Argentate (1‐), dicyano, potassium)
Pronamide (3, 5‐Dichoro‐N‐(1, l‐dimethyl‐2‐propynl benzamide)
1, 3‐ Propaneuslphone (1, 2‐0xathiolane 2, 2‐dioxide) n‐Propylamine (1‐Propane)  
Propy lthiouracil (Undecamethy lenediamine,  
N, N1
/2‐bis (2‐chlorobenzyl)‐, dihydrochloride
) 2‐Propyn‐l‐ol (Progargyl alcohol)  
Pyridine  
Reserpine (Yohimban‐16‐carboxylic acid, 11, l7‐dimethoxy‐18‐[(3, 4, 5‐trimethoxy‐                                                                    
benzoyl) oxyl‐, methyl ester)  
Resorcinol (1, 3‐benzenedio)  
Saccharin and salts (1, 2‐Benzoisothiazolin‐3‐one 1, l‐dioxide and salts)
Safrol (Benzene, 1, 2‐methylenedioxy‐4‐allyl‐)  
Selenious acid (Selenium dioxide)  
Selenium and compounds N.O.S. *  
Selenium sulphide (Sulphur selenide)  
Selenourea (Carbamimidoselenoic acid)  
Silver and compounds N.O.S. *  
Silver cyanide  
Sodium cyanide  
Streptozotcin (D‐G lucopyranose, 2‐deoxy‐ 2‐(3 ‐ methy 1‐ 3 ‐ nitrosoureido )‐ )
Strontium sulphide  
Strychinine and salts (Strychnidin‐l O‐one, and salts)  
1,2,4,5‐ Tetrachlorobenzene (Benzene, 1,2,4, 5‐tetrachloro‐)  
T etrachlorodibenzo‐ p‐dioxins  
Tetrachlorodibenzofurans  
2, 3, 7, 8‐ Tetrachlorodibenzo‐p‐dioxin (TCDD) Dibenzo‐p‐dioxin, 2, 3, 7, 8‐tetrachloro‐ 
Tetrachloroethane, N.O.S. * (Ethane, tetrachloro‐, N.O.S. *  
1,1,1, 2‐Tetrachlorethane (Ethane 1, 1,2, 2‐tetrachloro‐)  
Tetrachlorethylene (Ethane 1, 1, 2, 2,‐tetrachloro‐)  
Tetracholoromethane (Carbon tetrachloride)  
2, 3, 4, 6‐ Tetrachlorophenol (Phenol, 2, 3, 4, 6‐tetracholoro‐)  
Tetraethyldithiopyrophosphate (Dithiopyrophosphoric acid, tetraethyl‐ester)  
Tetraethyllead (Plumbane, tetraethyl‐)  
Tetraethylpyrophosphate (Pyrophosphoric acid, tetraethyl‐ester)
Tetranitromethane (Methane, tetranitro‐)  
Thallium and compounds, N.O.S.*  
Thallic oxide (Thallium (III) oxide)  
Thallium (1) acetate (Acetic acid, thallium (1) salt)  
Thallium (1) carbonate (Carbonate (Carbonic acid, dithallium (1) salt)
Thallium (1) chloride  
Thallium (1) nitrate (Nitric acid, thallium (1) salt) Thallium selenite  
Thallium (1) sulphate (Sulphuric acid, thallium (1 ) salt)  
Thioacetamide (Ethanethioamide)  
Thiosemicarbazide (Hydrazinecarbothioamide )  
Thiourea (Carbamide thio‐)  
Thiuram (Bis (dimethylthioucarbamoyl) disulphide)  
Toluene (Benzene, methyl‐)  
Toluenediamine, N.O.S. (Diaminotoluene)  
2, 2‐ Toluenediamine  
2, 6‐ Toluenediamine  
3, 4‐ Toluenediamine  
o‐Toluidine hydrochloride (Benzanamine, 2‐methyl‐, hydrochloride)  
Tolylene (disocyanate (Benzene, 1, 3‐diisocyanatometnyl‐)  
Toxaphene (Camphene, octachloro‐)  
Tribromomethane (Bromoform)  
1, 2i, 4‐ Trichlorobenzene (Benzene 1, 2, 4‐trichloro‐)
1, 1, 1‐ Trichloroethane (Methyl chloroform)  
1, 1, 2‐ Trichloroethane (Ethane, 1, 1, 2‐trichloro‐)  
Trichloroethane (Trichloroethylene)  
Trichloromethanethiol (Methanethiol, trichloro‐)  
Trichloromonofluoromethane (Methane, tricholorofluoro‐)
2, 4, 5‐ Trichlorophenol (Phenol, 2, 4, 5‐trichloro‐)  
2, 4, 6‐ Trichlorophenol (Phenol, 2, 4, 6‐trichloro‐)  
2, 4, 5‐ Trichlorophenoxyacetic acid (2, 4, 5‐ T) Acetic acid, 2, 4, 5‐trichlorophenoxy‐)  
2, 4, 5‐ Trichlorophenoxyacetic acid (2, 4, 5‐ TP) (Silver) Porpionic acid, 2‐(2, 4, 5‐  
trichlorophenoxyl)‐ )  
Trichloropropane, N.O.S. * (Propane trichloro‐, N.O.S. *
1,2, 3‐Trichloropropane (Propane, 1,2, 3‐trichloro‐)  
O,O,O,‐ Triethyl phosphorothioate (Phosphorothioic acid, 0, 0, O‐triethyl ester)  
Syo‐ Trinitrobenzene (Benzene, 1, 3, 5‐trinitro‐)  
Tris (1‐aziridinyl) phosphine sulphide (Phosphine sulphide, tris (Lariridinyl‐)  
Tris (2, 3‐dibromopropyl) phosphate (1‐Propanol, 2, 3‐dibromo‐, phosphate)  
Trypan blue (2, 7‐Napathalenededisulphonic acid, 3, 3'‐[(3, 3'‐dimethyl (1, 1, biphenyl)‐                                                                                  
4, 4'‐duyl) bis (azol) [bis (5‐amino‐4‐hydroxy‐, tetrasodium salt)  
Uracil mustard (Uracil 5‐[bis (2‐chloroethyl) amino]‐)
Vanadic acid, ammonium salt (ammonium vanadate)
Vanadium pentroxide (Vanadium (V) oxide)  
Vinyl chloride (Ethane, chloro‐)  
Zinc cyanide  
Zinc phosphide  
*The abbrevation N.O.S. signifies those members of general class "not otherwise specified" by name in listing.  