},I·
f
,
tACTS
Supplement to the Sierra Leone Gazette Vol. CXXXl, No. 14
dated 2nd March, 2000
THE ENVIRONMENT PROTECTION ACT. 2000
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS
Section
PART I - PRELIMINARY
1. Interpretation
PART II - ADMINISTRATION
2. Establishment of the National Environment Protection Board
3. Composition and tenure of office of'the Board
4. Functions of the Board
5. Meetings of the Board
6. Committees
7. Procedure of Board and committees
;~ 8. Honorariurn
9. Duties of Minister
10. Power to delegate
11. Department of the Environment
12. Responsibilities of the Department
13. Duties of the Director
PART III - ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENTS
14. Prohibition of certain activities
15. Application for and issue of licences
16. Director to decide on need for environmental impact assessments
17. Director to issue licences
18. Applicant to prepare environmental impact assessment
19. Public comments
20.'Directof to submit comments, etc. to Board
21. Director to issue licences
22. Effect of licences
23. Renewal of licences
24. Appeal against decision
25. Licence fees
26. Cancellation. suspensionor modification of licences
V. Transferability of licences
28. Register
29. Director to monitor projects
30. Duties ofowners of projects
31. Identification of authorised officers
32 Protection of officers
33. Financial security
34. Environmental standards
35. Toxic and hazardous substances
36. Notification to the ~nister
37. Legal proceedings
j
PART IV - THE NATIONAL ENVJReNMENT FUND
38. &tabIishment of the National Environment Fund
39. Pbjectives oftheFund
40. Accounts and audit
PART V - REGULATIONS
41. Regulations
FIRST SCHEPULE
SECON0 SCHEDUlE
THIRD SCHFDULE
£1....."&&.1(1_
SIGNED this 28th day ofFebruary, 2000.
------ ....---:- ....... ,,~--.~~.~
"
ALHAJI AHMAD TEJAN KASSAB,
"President.
I , It
t
,No.2
The EnmoDDlent Proteetio. A~' 2000 . Shorttitle.
Being an Ad to provide for the" elfedive protedIoD. or the
environment, the administrative maehinery- to e...ure suell • pro~tloD and for other related matters.
(2nd MIlTCh, 2000J Dalem
Qw•...,1CeENACI'ED by the President and M~mbe~ of Parliament in this mad.
presentParliament assembled. . -
2 No."2 Environment Protection Act 2000
Interprelation.
PART I - PRELIMINARY
1. In thisAct, unless the contextotherwise requires-
"air' includes air within a building, a vehicle or any
enclosure orstructure or theair spaceofSierraLeone;
"airspace" means the airspace within the territorial
fimits of SierraLeone;
"Director"meanstheDirectorfortheDepartmentof the
Environment of the Ministry;
"discharge" includes deposit,emissionor leakage;
"disposal" includes both land-based disposal and
dumping in waters and airspace of SierraLeone;
"effluent limitation"meansany restriction established
by theMinistry on quantities, ratesandconcentration
of chemical, physical, biological or othercoostituents
which are discharged from point sources or other
sources into the waters of SierraLeone or on, or into
the land.
"environment" includes land,air, waterand all plants,
animals and human beings, living therein and the
inter-relationship which existsamong these or anyof
them; ,
"licence" means environmental impact assessment "
licence;
"Minister" means" the Minister charged with
responsibility for the environment;
"Ministry" means the Ministry charged wi th
responsibility fordle environment;
"monitoring" includes the inspection," measurement,
sampling or analysis ofthe discharge of a pollutant or
ofanyenvironmental medium inanylocality, whether
periodically or continuously;
-
... _ __" ....._~ ~"..,. .."..,..,..--._"""".,~..-.-_~ _ w _~.... _ _
"""~ I
,'\ "+ No.2 Environment Protection Act 2000 A
"offshore facility"meansany facility ofany kind located
over,in,on,or underanyof the watersofSietTaLeone;
"onshore facility" means any facility of any kind
(including motor vehicles and rolling stock) located
over, in or under any land withinSierra Leone other
than submerged land;
"owner" includes-
(a) in the case of a vessel the owner, operator or
t. charterer of the vessel;
(b) in the case of an onshore facilityor an offshore
facility, the owner or operatorofsuch facility;
(c) in thecaseof anyabandoned offshorefacility, the
owner or operator of such facility immediately
before its abandonment; and t,. (d) in the case of a project, a person managing or
controllingsuch project;
"pollution"meansany natural, man-made or man-aided
alte~on ofthechemical,physical orbiol<>$ical quality
oftheenvironntent to the extent that is detrimentalto#
. (he environment or beyond acceptable limits and "",.. pollutants shall be construedaccordingly; .
"prescribe" means prescribe by regulations;
"project'" means any activity which reqU!res a licence
,-.~ under this Act;
I "removal" means removal of hazardous substances
I
t from the air,landor water,including'shorelines or the I
taking of such other action as may be necessary:to I:
minimize damageto public~th or welfare, ecology
and natural resources of Sierra Leone;
,--.,.
4 EnvironmelJI Protection Act
"standards" includes criteria and specifications;
"waters ofSierra Leone" means all water resourcesin
. any form, including atmospheric, surface and subswface and underground water-resources whether the
water resources are in territorial waters, Exclusive
Economic Zone or any area under the jurisdiction of
the Republic of Sierra Leone,
PART II-ADMINISTRATION
3. (1) The Board shall comprise- r
(a) achairmanwhobas considerable knowledge and
experience in environmental matters; and
(b) twelve otherpersons,
(2) Thechairman and othermembers ofthe Board shall be
appointed by thePresident with the approval of Parliament
(3) member of the Board including the chairman shall
hold office for a termofthree years and may bere-appointed.
. (4) The cbairman or any other member ofthe Board may
resign his officeby written notice to the Ministerand may beremoved
fromofficeby aTribunal'forinability to discharge the functions of his
office.
Establis~t~ 1. There is hereby established the National Environment
~~r:'= ProtectionBoard <hereinafter referredto as "theBoard"),
Protection
Board
Composition
and tenure of
officeof the
Board.
(5) A Tribunalshall beconstituted by theMinisterand shall
consistof a chairman and two other persons.
(6) A Tribunal shall regulate the procedure for its sittings;
but the member of the Board concerned shall be heard before any
decision is taken by the Board concerning such person.
FUDdians eX 4. The Board sbaUtbeBalrd.
(a) facilitate coordination, cooperation and
collaboration among Government Ministries,
local authorities andothergovernmental agencies
in all areas relating to environmental protection; -.
.;}
h
No. 2 Environment Protection Act 5
~,
r
. t
(b) review national and sectoral enviroDmeDtaI
policies and make such recoDUDeIMIa1io or
it may think neoessaJy tothe Minister;
(c) review environmental impact assessments
prepared pursuant .to this Act and mate
appropriaterecommendations to theDim:tor;
(d) investigate or cause to be investipted. 38y
activity, occurrence or transaetioa which it
considers is likely to bave or result in hanDful
consequences to the environmentaod advise Oft
measures neoessaJy to preventorminimisesuch
consequences;
(e) advise the Minister on areas of enviroDmentai
protection and control requiriDg special or
additioDal measures, iDdialtiDg the pioIi1iesand
specificgoalsto be achieved;
(I) undertake or cause to be undeJtataI specific
studies and research aimed_ at developing
stlategies for theprotectiOll oftheeaviromneat
and make appropriate recom~ to the
Minister; and
(g) oonsideranyodlermanerswbidlmayberefened
to it by the Minister and make appropriate
recommendations or proposals1hI::moo..
s. (I) Subjectto theprovisioDsofIbis seclim, theBc.dshall Mrs;".of
meet at suchtimes and places as it thinks expedientfortbe traIJSaCIion dieBoad..
ofits business.
(2) Special meetings oftheBaud may be CODveued at the
request ofthe Minister.
(3) The quorum for a meetingm1heBoanI shaD be seven.
(4) Tbecbairmanshall presideatmeehDSSoftbeBoaRIaod
in his absence a member of the 80aRI appointed by die membem
present shall preside.
6 No.2 Environment Protection Act
&
(5) The Board may co-opt any person to advise it on any
issue at its meetings and such co-opted person may participate in the
deliberations of the Boardbutshall not voteonany matterfor decision
bythe Board.
(6) Decisions at meetingsof the Board shall be taken by a
majority of thememberspresentand votingandthechairman or other
person presiding shall, in the eventof equalityin votes, have a casting v~. .
Committees. 5. The Board may establish and constitute such committees
thereofto perform such functions asit may thinknecessary.
Pr~ure d 1. SubjecttotheprovisionsofthisAct,theBoardcudcommittees
~a:.. thereof shall regulate the procedure at their meetings.
Honorarium. 8. Members ofthe Boardand committees thereof s~ll be paid
suchhonorarium as theMinisterafterconsultation withtheMnisterfor
Finance may determine.:
L
Dutiesc1
Minister.
9. (1) The Minister shall have responsibility for-
(a) the setting of national environmental goak and
objectives and proposing and developing JX*ies
on all aspects concerning environme.tal
ptoteetion and management;
(b) requesting and receiving information frot
GovernmentMinistries, local authorities andothel
agencies on actions or measures taken, being
taken or planned where in the opinion of the
Ministersuch actions or measures have resulted
or are expected to result in harm to the
environment;
(c) the implementation of the provrsrons of
international conventions and protocols on the
environment acceded to by Sierra Leone;
<
•
No.2 linvironment Protection Act 7 .. (d) the provision within the resources available, of
information. advice,technical or otherassistance
to GovernmentMinistries.local authoritiesand
other agencies with regard to any measures or
actionsto be takenor required for the protection
of the environment and ,the preservation of the
ecology;
(e) the issuance of notifications or demands for
remedial actionif in theopinion of the Minister.
anyactiontaken, beingtakenor planneddoes not
or will not conform to the requirements of this
Act;
(0 reviewing the prog-ress made in the
implementation of the National Environmental
Action Plan and issuing such directions as are
necessary.
(2) The Ministershall seek and promoteco-operation and
collaboration with otherMinisters and international bodiesconcerned
with programmes and activities having impactQIl the environment in
order to co-ordinate and facilitate the most rational use of available
resources for the protection and preservation of the environment
(3) The Minister shall fco-operate~·with and assist nongovernmental organisations, industries, voluntary associations and
groups for the purpose of fostering and increasing awareness of the
necessity forprotecting theenvironmentand identifyingandpublicising
effective and realistic strategies and measures for protecting the
environment.
10. (1) Subjectto subsection(2), theMinistermaydelegate any Power to
of hispowers and responsibilities underthisAclto theDirectorOrsuch delegate.
officer within the Ministry as he may think fit
(2) The Minister shall not delegate his PQwer to make
regulations under section41.
8 No.2 Environment Protection Act
L
Deparlmentof 11. -. (1) There is hereby established within the Ministry the
:VilODIDeIlt. Department of the EnvironmenL
(2) .The Department shall be headed by the Director who
shall be a public officer.
(3) Tbe Directorshall be professionally knowledgeable in
environmen1al protection matters.
Respomibilities 11 (1) The Deparlment of the Environment shall, subject to
~lDd1t. this Act, coordinate all the environmentally related activities of
Government Ministries and local authorities andact as the focal point
of aU Didional and international environmental matters relating to
Siam Leone.
< (2) In addition to its duties under subsection (I), the
Departmentshall-
(a) 1»ro~ote the formulation of national
environmental goals and strategies;
(b) formulate or promote the formulation of, and
.tDonitor the implementation of environmental
Policies, progmmmesand projects,standards and
regulations;
(c) advi~ the Minister on environmental matters;
(d) establish and coordinate working groupsto study
specific environmental problems or issues;
4
(e) promote and support environmental education
and training;
(0 pat1icipate at crucial stages of the government's ,
revieW of development programmes through
environmental impact assessment reports;
(g) prepare and publish overall assessment of the
state ofthe environment;
Environment Protection Act 9
- (h) cooRlinate and monitor tile implementation cI
national environmental policies;
(i) cooperate with Government Ministries, local
authorities andotheragencies onmatterS rdating
to environmental protection and"management;
fj) collect and make available to the public or
interested persons or organisations, through
publications and other appqxiate meansand in
ooopemtion with publicor private0tpniDti0ns,
environmental dataand information;
(k) promote the establishment of nationa]
environmental standan:Is;
(1) provide secretarial services to the Board and
othersubsidiary bodies;
(m) canyomotherduliesasarenecessaryorexpedient
for the full discharge" its duties underthis Act
13. (I) The Directorshall,sUbject to the policy guiclana:ofthe ~es of the
Minister have responsibility for the implementationofthe" National DiRdor.
Environmental Action Plan.
(2) TheDirector~y in writing designate any officere#the
Department as an authorised officer and)llay delegate to such officer
any of the powers or duties conferredon him by thisAct
PART III - ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENTS
14. (1) Except as otherwise provided in this Act and Prohibitionof'
notwithstanding the provisions of any enactment, no person shall
undertake or cause to be undertaken any ofthe projects setout in the actiVIties.
RntSchedule unless beholds a valid licence in respectofsuch project.
(2) -Anypersonwbooonbavenesdteprovisionsdsubsection
(I) commits an offence and is liable on conviction to" a fine not
exceedingfivemillionleonesin the caseofa citizenorSienaLeoneand
five thousand United States dollars in thecaseofnoo-citizens cLSierra
Leooeorto a termofimprisonment notexceeding two yearsorto both
the fine and imprisonment. .
No.1
10 No. 2 Environment Protection Act 2000
•
Application
forand issue
of licences.
(
15. (1) Notwithstanding the provisions of any enactment, any
person who wishes to undertake or causeto be undertaken-any of the
projects set out in the First Schedule shallapply to the Director for a
licence.
(2) Anapplication shall be accompanied bya descriptionof
the project proposed to be undertaken.
Director to 16. (1) The Directorshall, within fourteen daysof receiving an t;ide on need application and after consultation with the Board decide whether an
environmental environmental impact assessment isrequiredin respect of the project
impact.
assessments. (2) The matters set out in the Second Schedule shall be
taken intoconsideration when a decision is being taken asto whether
an environmental impact assessment is required in respect of any
project.
Director to
issue licence.
Applicant to
prepare
environmental
impect"
assessment.
Public
comments.
17. Where a decision has been taken that an environmental
impact assessment is notrequired in respect of anyproject theDirector
shallissue to the applicant a licence.
18. (1) Anapplicantshall, where a decision has beentaken that
a project so requires, prepare and submit to the Directoran environmental impact assessment in respect of the project.
(2) An environmental impactassessment shall contain the
information set out in the Third Schedule.
19. (1) TheDirectorshall, afterreceiving ap environmentimpact
assessment, circulate it to professional bodies or associations,
Government Ministries and non-governmental organisations for their
comments.
(2) Without prejudice to subsection (1), the Directorshall
make an environmental impactassessment openfor public inspection
andcomments andheshall givenotice tothateffect in twoconsecutive
issues of the Gazette and twoissues in a newspaper; exceptthat in the
case of a newspaper there shall be an interval of 1:1t least seven days
between the first and secondpublications.
No.1 Environment Protection Act 11
(3) Comments made underthissection shall be submitted
within fourteen daysofthe lastpublication in theGazette or newspaper
as the case may be, to the Director.
r 20. (1) The Directorshall,after recel~~ng the commentson an Director to
environmental impact assessment, submit the environmental impact submit
th .th th " th h B d f comments etc. assessment loge er wr e comments ereon to t e oar lor Its to Board.
consideration.
(2) The Board may, after considering the environmental
impact assessmentand the comments thereof, if any-
, (a) referthem backto the Director witha direction to
issuea licenceon suchterms and conditions as it
considersappropriate;
(b) require the applicant to furnish additional
information as may be needed to determine the
environmental impact of the activity; or
(c) disapprove theenvironmental impact assessment
where it is satisfied that the project and the
alternatives proposed in theassessment willhave
significant adverse effect on the environment,
peopleor society.
;
""!'
(3) An environmental impact assessmentreferred: hack to
the applicant under paragraph (b) of subsection (2) for additional
information shall be resubmitted withintwenty-one daysof the date of
the reference failing which the application lapses. "
(4) Where an environmental impact assessment has "been
disapproved the applicationin respectof the projectshall be rejected
. by the Director.
21. "Yithout Prejudice to section 17, the Directorshall, wherethe Directorto
Boardso directs,issuea licenceto an applicant in respectof a project. issue licences.
22. An environmental impact assessment licence issued under FIfeet of
this Actshall- . licences.
12 No.2
._---
Eavironmenl Protection Act
(a) bein the prescribed form;
(b) authorise thelicensee to undertake such activity
as may bespecifiedtherein;
(c) tJe·validfor twelve months fromthedate ofissue
orsuchperiodastheDirectormaydetermine; and
(d) contain sucb conditionsas may be necessary for
the protectionofthe environment.
.1
Reoewalof
licences.
23. A licencemay at expirationoftheperiod specifiedinit be
renewed by theDirector upon application by theowner ofthe project,
for such further period as the Director may determine.
A~ against 24. Any person aggrievedby a decision to reject his application
deciSIOIL or not to renew his licence may appeal to-the High Court.
Licence fees. 25. The Ministermay by regulationsprescribe fees for licences
issued under this Act
. 26. (1) Where-
.
(a) the terms andconditions ofa licence are notbeing
complied with or have been contravened; or
(b) there isa substantial change in the operations of
a project resulting in an adverse effect on the
environment,
the Director may in consultation with the Board-
(i) cancel the licence;
(ii) suspend the licence for such time as
he thinks appropriate; or
(iii) impose additional or modified
conditions for the licence.
No.Z .. Environment Protection Act ·13 .
,
\
(2) The Directorshallnotify the holderof ~rlicence-wbielr---------.--.-----
has been cancelled.suspendedor onwhich~tional conditions have
been imposed,ofsuch canceUati~ suspension or the impositionof
additional conditions. ~"'
(3) The Directormay, in addition to the powers confened
undersubsection (I) prescribemeasuresto be by theownerofthe
project to abate such adverseeffectson or anydamage the
environment
(4) The Directormay imposesuch tenus andconditioos as
f he maythinknecessary forthe resumption ofoperatiOns ofa projectin
respectof whicha licence bas been cancelledors~
(5) Any personaggrievedby adecision tocancel orsuspend
a licencemay,withinfourteendaysofthe notificatiolidthe~ncellalioo
or suspension appeal to the High Court.
- -
11. (I) Subjectto theprovisions of sedion,licencesare not Traasferability
uansferable. oflicences.
(2) Where prior to the issue of a licence in respect of a
project the ownership, oontrol or management ofthatprojectchanges,.
the previous ownel"and thenew ownersball notify the Directorin
writing within fourteen days of the transfer of ownership, oontrol or
. management
(3) Upon notification pursuant to subsedion (2), the new
ownershall be deemed to be the applicant for a licence.
(4) Where afterthe issue ofa licence in respectofa project
the ~wnersbip, conttolor management of that poject changes, the
preVIOUSownerand the newownershallboth notify theDirectorwithin
fourteen daysofthe tnmsferof ownership, con~ or managemenL
(5) TheDirectorsbaIl, upondue notification and fulfilment
of relevant conditions by the.new owner endorse the licence and the
transfer shall be valid upon such endorsement
'IM"-,----------------------......---....- ....
14 No.2 Environment Protection Act
Register.
Directorto
monitor
. projects.
(6) Any; person who, being the previous owner or new
ownerof a project fails, after a transferto notify the Directoras required
in this section, commitsan offence and is liable on conviction to a fine
not exceeding three million leones in the case of a citizen of Sierra
Leone and one thousand five hundred United States dollars in the case
of a non-citizen of Sierra Leone or to a term of imprisonment not
exceeding one year; and the licence in respect of that projectshall be
deemed cancelled at the expiration of the fourteen day period.
28. (1) The Director shall maintain a register in which he shall
record such particulars relating to licences issued as may beprescribed.
(2) The Director shall effect changes in particulars and
rectify any clerical errors in the register or other document containing
extracts from the register.
29. (1) The Director shall monitor all projects in respect of
which licences have been issued in order to assess their effect on the
environment or ascertain compliance with the provisions of this Act.
(2) Forthe effective exercise ofthe powersin subsection (1)
the Director may-
(a) request from the owner of a project information
or documentation pertaining to the project
including any licence issued under this Act;
.(b) enter any premises where a project is being
undertaken and inspect the project.
. (3) Where the Director has reasonable grounds to believe
an offence has been committed or is about to be committed against this
Act, he may without a warrant-
(a) enter, inspect and search any premises, vessel,
vehicle or facility in which he has reasonable
groundsto believe an offence has been oris being
committed;
(b) performtests and take samples of any substances
relating to such offence;
_
..
---------------
No.2 Environment Protection Act
(c) seize any document, itemorsubstance which he
has reasonable grounds to believe has been used
in thecommissionofsuchoffence orin respect of
which an offence has been committed; or
(d) arrest any person whom he suspects to have
committed an offence.
15
,.
(4) A receipt shall be given for anything seized under this
section stating therein the grounds for the seizure.
(5) Any person arrested without a warrant under this section
shall be taken to the nearest police station.
JO. (1) The owner of a project shall penni t and assist the Duties of
Director to have full access to- owners u( projects.
(a) the project premises and the project whenev er the
Director thinks necessary for the exercise of his
powers under this Ad; or
(b) the project's records.
(2) Any owner who fails to comply with subsection (1)
commits an offence and is liable on conviction to a tine not exceeding
...r five hundred thousand leones or to a term of Imprisonment not
exceeding one year or to both the fine and imprisonment.
31. (1) An authorised officer when exercising anyof the powers Identification
conferred by this Act shall, on request, produce identification to show offfiauthorised
o cers.
that he is an authorised officer.
(2) Notwithstanding the provisions of this Act, no person
shall be deemed to have committed an offence under this Act where an
authorised officer refuses or fails to comply with a request to produce
identification pursuant to subsection ( 1).
b
16 No.2 Environment Protection Act 2000
-"·_-~·~Pffitecuooor--~··__ ·"32:---Noperson acting in pursuance of thefunctions conferred on
<ificers. him by this Act shall be subject to any civil or criminal liability in
respect of such act, whether on the grounds of want of jurisdiction,
mistake oflaw or fact or any other ground, unless he acted in bad faith
and without reasonable cause.
Financial
_ security.
Environmental
standards.
33. (1) The Minister may by statutory instrument make
'regulations providing that persons responsible for specified projects
shall take and maintain insurance orother appropriate financial seeurity
to guarantee paymentof compensation for damage caused as a result of
the operations ofthe project or the payment for preventive measures or
"restorative action where necessary.
(2) Regulations made under this section shall specify the
minimum amount ofinsurance or other appropriate financial security
to be maintained in respect ofspecified projects, together with any other
requirements regarding the period of cover and the conditions under
which such cover may cease or the liability of the insurer may be
avoided by reason ofany act or omission on the partofthe party insured.
34. The Minister may by statutory instrument make regulations
establishing national environmental standards for the following-
(i) water quality;
,(ii) effluent limitations;
(iii) air quality;
(iv) waste;
(v) atmospheric protection;
(vi) ozone protection;
(vii) noise control;
(viii) pesticide residues; and
(ix) odour.
No.2 Environment Protection Act 17
.,,~,
35. (1) The MiniSter mayon the adViCe of the Boa1iI prescribe Toxic and
activities or substances which shall beconsidered hazardous. su~.
(2) The Ministershall take all necessary and appropriate
measures to monitor, control and regulate the manufacture, sale,
transportation, handling or disposal of toxic and hazanloussubstances,
includingtoxic and hazardous wastes.
(3) The introduction or importation of toxic or hazardous
wastesintoSierraLeone forstorageordisposal byanymeans whatsoever
is prohibited.
(4) The possession, introduction or importation into Siena
Leone of internationally banned chemicals or substances is prohibited.
(5) The discharge of any toxic and hazardous substance
into the air or in, on or under the land and waters of Siena Leone is
promhited. -
(6) Anyperson whocontravenesthe provisionsofsubsection
(3), (4) or (5) commits an offenceand is liable on conviction to a fine
not exceeding two million leones or to a term of imprisonment not
exceeding two years or to both the fine and imprisonment
(7) Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (5), it
shall be a defence ifit is proved thatthe discharge wascausedsolely by
a natural disaster or an act of war. I
(8) Without prejudice to subsection (1), a Court may
declare an activity or substance to be hazardous where the Court is
satisfied on the evidence beforeit thatthe activity or substance has the
potential of causing grave damage to the environment
36. ( 1) Where a vessel oronshore or offshore facility is used or Noti~onto
is involved in the commission of an offence against subsection (5) of the Mimster.
section 35 the owner or operator ofsuch vessel or onshore or offshore
facility shall-
(a) promptly notify the Minister or other relevant
authority of the discharge;
18 No.2 Environment Protection Act
(b) take all possible measures in accordance with
standard removal methods to minimize pollution;
(c) promptly comply with such other directions as
the Minister may from time to time prescribe.
(2) An owner or operator who fails to comply with subsection (I) commits an offence and is liable on conviction to a fine not
exceeding five million leones or to a term of imprisonment not
exceeding two years or to both the fine and imprisonment.
Legal 37. Where any offence has been committed by a company or by
proceedings. any memberof a partnership, finn or business, every Director, Manager,
Secretary or other officer of that company directly connected with the
project or any other member of the partnership or other person
connected with the management ofsuch firm or business shall be liable
for such offence unless he proves to the satisfaction ofthe Court that-
(a) he used all due diligence to secure compliance .
with the Act; and
(b) such offence was committed without his
knowledge, consent or connivance.
PART IV - THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT FUND
Establishment 38. (1) There ts hereby established a Fund to be known as the
ofEn~e Nationtal National Environment Fund (hereafter referred to as "the Fund''). vironmen
Fund.
(2) The Fund shall consist of-
(a) all monies provided by Government; and
(b) donations, grants or bequests.
(3) The Fund shall only be applied for the purposes of its
objectives.
(4) The Fund shall be managed and controlled by the
Director who shall for this purpose be accountable to the Minister.
I I
No.2 Environment Protection Act 19
(5) Notwithstanding subsection (4), .no money shall be
withdrawn from the Fund except under authority of a warrant issued by
the Minister responsible for Finance.
39. The objectives of the Fund are-
(a) to provide foreign or local laboratory support for
the analysis of environmental samples;
(b) to carry out programmes to prevent or reduce
pollution;
(c) to promote environmental education and research;
(d) to support any governmental organisations
engaged in environmental protection;
(e) to encourage local environmental initiatives;
(0 to publish reports on the environment; and
(g) to promote, support and encourage activities of
the Board.
Objectives of
the Fund.
40. ( 1) The Director shall keep proper accounts and records in Accounts and
relation to the Fund. audit.
,
(2) The accounts shall be audited annually hy the AuditorI General or an independent auditor appointed by the Auditor-General.
(3) The Director shall not later than three months after the
end of each financial year-
(a) submit to the Minister a report on the activities
supported by the Fund and the financial position
of the Fund during that financial year;
(b) submitto the Auditor-General an annuaJstatement
ofthe receipts and payments ofthe Fund together
with a balance sheet showing the assets and
liabilities of the Fund in respect of that financial
year.
20 No.2 Environment Protection Act 2000
•
(4) The Ministershall present a copyofthe annual reports
and audited annual accounts ofthe Fund together with any comments
he maymake thereon to the Cabinet
(5) The MInister may, in consultation with the Minister
responsible for Finance, from time to time issue directives regulating
.me use ofthe Fund."
PART V - REGULATIONS
Regulations. 41. (1) Without prejudice to the other provisions of this Act,
the Minister may by statutory instrument make regulations for the
implementation of the purposes ofthis Act
(2) Regulationsmadepursuanttosubsection(1)mayprovide
for-
(a) the licensing of anyproject or class or category
of projects;
(b) the criteria for the approval of environmental
impact assessments;
I'
(c) the minimum amount of insurance or other
appropriate financial security to be maintained in
respect ofspecified activities or projects;
(d) standards or methods for preventing or
minimising pollution;
(e) offences against theregulations and penaltiesfor
such offences; and
(1) anyother matter which is required or authorised
to be prescribed.
2 ...222&&].... _
No.2 Environment Protection Acr- 21
ARST SCHFDULE (Sections 14and 15)
(g)
.
.
"1
(h)
(i)
•
!
PROJECTS REQUIRING ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT
LICENCES
A licence is required for the projects whose activities involve or include the
foHowing:-
(a) substantial changes in renewable resource use (e.g. conversion
of land to agricultural production, forestry or to pasture land,
rural development, timber production);
(b) substantial changes in farming and fisheries practices (e.g.
introduction of newcrops, largescalemechanisation or use of
chemicals in agriculture);
(c) exploitation of hydraulic resources (e.g, dams, drainage and
irrigation projects, water basin development, water supply);
(d) infrastructure (e.g. roads, bridges, airports, harbours,
transmission lines, pipelines, railways);
(e) industrial activities(e.g.metallurgical plants,wood processing
plants, chemical plants, power plants, cement plants, refinery
and petro-chemical plants, agro-industries);
(1) extractive- industries (e.g. mining, quarrying, extraction of
sand, gravel, salt, peat, oil and gas);
waste management and disposal (e.g, sewerage systems and
treatment plants, landfills, treatment plants for household and
hazardous waste);
housing construction and development schemes;
establishmentof places ofentertainment, motorrepair garages
and welding shops;
(j) importation ofsecond hand vehicles.
22 No.1 Environment Protection Act
SECOND SCHEDULE (Section 16)
•
Factors for determining whether a project requires an environmental impact
assessment-
(a) the environmental impact on the community;
(b) the locationof the project;
(c) whether the project transforms the locality;
(d) whether the project has or is likely to have substantial impact
on the ecosystem of the locality;
(e) whether the project results in the diminution of the aesthetic,
recreational, scientific, historical, cultural or other
environmental quality of the locality;
(I) whether the project will endanger any species offlora or fauna
or the habitat of the flora or fauna;
(g) the scale of the project;
(h) the extent ofthe degradation ofthe quality ofthe environment;
;
(i) whether the project will result in an increase in demand for
natural resources in the locality;
(j) the cumulative impact of the project together with other
activities or projects, <?n the environment;
THIRD SCHEDULE (Section 18)
CONTENTS OF ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT (EIA)
An EIA shall contain a true statement and description of-
(a) the location of the project and its surroundings;
_ _L.::t_.jZ.a.z.s•.....• -I!II!!!!!!IJ----IBI
No.2 Environment Protection Act 23
\
Y
(b) the principle, concept and purpose of the project;
(C) the direct or indireet erreets that the project is likel y to have on
the environment;
(d) the social, economic and cui tural effects that the project is
likely to have on people and society;
(e) the communities, interested parties and Government ministries
consulted;
(f) any actions or measures which may avoid, prevent, change,
mitigate or remedy the likely effect on people and society;
(g) any alternatives to the proposed project;
(h) natural resources in the locality to be used in the project;
(i) the plans for decommissioning of the project;
(j) such otherinformation as may be necessary for a proper review
of the potential environmental impact of the project.
(
Passed in Parliament this 1st day of February, in the year of our Lord two
thousand.
J. A. CARPENTER,
Clerk ofParliament.
THIS PRINTED IMPRESSION has been carefully compared by me with the Bill
which has passed Parliament and found by me to be a true and corrcctly printed copy
of the said Bill.
J. A. CARPENTER,
Clerk ofParliament.