THE ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT ACT, 2004
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS
Section
. .
Title
PART I
PRELIMINARY PROVISION$
1. Short title.
· -2. Commencement and application.
3. Interpretation.
PART II
. GENERAL PRINCIPLES .
4. Right to clean, safe and healthy environment.
5. Right to bring an action on environment.
6. Duty to protect the environment .
. 7. Principles of environmental management.
8. Obligation to give effect to environmental principles.
9. Promotion of the National Environmental Policy.
_ l~- Envi~nment Day. . . . .,
PART III
ADMINISTRATION AND INSTITUTIONAL ARRANGEMENT
(a) National Environmental Advisory Committee
11 . Establishment and composition ofmembe~ of the Committee.
12. Functions of the National Environmental Advisory Committee.
(b) Minister Responsible for Environment
13. Powers of the Minister.
(c) Director of Environment
14. Director of Environment.
15. Functions of the Director of Environment.
(d) National Environment Management Council
16. The Council.
17. . Object for establishment of the Council. 
2 No. 20 Environmental Management 2004
18. Functions of the Council. ·
19. Board of the Council.
20. Conduct of business and affairs of the Council.
21. Appointment of the Director General.
22. Staff and employees of the Councit ~ · ·
23. General powers of the Council.
24. Powers of the Council in respect of other agencies .
25. Powers of the Council to ensure compliance.
26. Petfoiniance ofthe -functlons··ofthe-Coimcil by other bodies.
27. Common seal of the Council.
28. Indemnity of the Board, member, etc., from personal liability.
29. Conflict of interest.
(e) Sector Ministries
30. Establishment <>f sector environment section.
-31. . Functions of sector envirorimenf sectiori.
32. Submission of sector Ministries report.
33. Appointment or designation of a sector environment
coordinator.
(I) Regional Secretariat
34. Regional coordination on environmental management.
35. Appointment or designation of a regional environment
management expert.
(g) Local Govemm~nt Authorities . . .
36. Functions of local government environment management officer.
37. Standing Committees of local government authorities.
38. Standing Committees in townships, wards, villages and
Vitongoji.
39. Designation of the Township, Ward, Village, Mtaa and
Kitongoji Environment Management Officer.
40. Functions of the Township, Ward, Village,·Mtaa and Kitongoji
Environment Management Officer. _ . __
41. General powers of the City, Municipal, District, Township,
Ward, Village, Mtaa and Kitongoji Environment Management
Committees. 
No. 20 Environmental Management
PART IV
ENVIRONMENTAL PLANNING
42. Local government authorities environmental action plans.
43. Environmental plans at sector level.
44. Environntental. planning at national level.
45. Regulations on preparation, adoption and implementation of
action plans.
46. Public participation in preparation of National Environmental
2004 3
Actiori Pian.· · ·· · · · ·· ·· · · · · ·· · · · · ·· ··
PARTV
ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT . .
(a) Environmental Protected Areas
4 7. . Declaration of Environmental Protected Areas.
48. . Environinerttal protection plan . and· eoosyste~ management ..
plan for Environmental Protected Areas.
(b)_ Envir.on~ental Management Plans for National Pmt!c,ted Areas
49. Environmental Management Plans for National Protected Areas.
(c) Conservation and Protection
50. Land utilization management.
51. Environmentally sensitive areas.
52. Identification .of-environmentally sensitive areas. -
53. Environmental conditions to village lands.
54. Declaration of protected river, riverbank, lake or lakeshore
and shoreline.
55. Protection and management of rivers, riverbanks, lake or
lakeshore and shoreline.
56. Declaration of protected wetlands.
57. Prohibition of human activities in certain areas.
5 8. Protection of mountains, hills and landscapes.
59. Promotion of coastal zone environmental management.
60. Environmental obligations under water laws.
61. Minister may advise on the discharge of sewerage. 
4 No. 20
62.
63.
64.
65.
66.
67.
68.
69.
70.
71.
72.
73.
74.
75.
76.
77.
78.
79.
Environmental Management
Consultation on discharge.
Management of forest resources.
Promotion of conservation of energy.
2004
Promotion of conservation of fisheries and wildlife resources, etc.
Conservation of biological diversity.
Coriservation·ofbiological diversity in-situ.
Conservation of biological diversity ex-situ.
Regulation for the development, handling, and use of Genetically
Modified. Qrganisms and ~eir products.
Management of rangelands. -
Environmental land use planning directives.
Obligation to use land sustainably.
Prote~tion of natural and cultural heritage.
Protection of the atmosphere.
Measures on climate change.
Management of working environment and dangerous materials
and processes.
Powers-of the Minister to make regulations on persistent organic
pollutants.
Prior infunned caisent procedures fur certain hazardous chemicals
and pesticides. . _ _ _
Promotion of cleaner production and sustainable consumption of
goods and services.
(d) Economic Instruments
80. Economic incentives and instnunents for the protection of the
environment.
PARTVI
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT AND
OrnER ASSESSMENTS
81. Obligation to undertake Environmental Impact Assessment.
82. Environmental Impact Assessment regulations and guidelines.
83. F.nvironmental Impact Assessment to be conducted by experts.
84. Issuance of certificate not a defence in legal proceedings.
85. Determination of the scope of Environmental Impact Statement.
86. Environmental Impact Statement.
87. Review of Environmental Impact Statement. 
No. 20 Environmental Management
88. Inspection visit for purpose of Environmental Impact
Statement review.
89. Public participation in Environmental Impact Assessment.
90. Public hearing and information disclosure.
91. Recommendations on Environmental Impact Statement by the
Council.
92. Approval or disapproval of Environmental Impact Statement
by the Minister.
93. Cancellation of licence upon disapproval of Environmental
ImpactAssessment. . . -
94. Delegation of powers to approve Environmental Impact
Assessment.
95. Appeal against decision of the Minister on Environmental
Impact Assessment.
96. Maintenance of records of decisions on Environmental Impact
Assessment.
97. Requirement of fresh . Environmental Impact Assessment
study: · ·
98. Offence for contravening EIA.
99. Environmental monitoring.
100. Monitoring compliance with Environmental Impact Statement.
101. Environmental audit.
102. Undertaking of safe decommissioning and site rehabilitation.
103. Other assessments.
PART VII
STRATEGIC ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT
· l 04. Strategic environmental assessment .. of Bills, . regulatiQns,
policies, strategies, programmes and plans.
105. Strategic environmental assessment for mineral, petroleum,
hydro-electric power and major water project plans.
PARTVIII
POLLUTION PREVENTION AND CONTROL
106. General prohibition of pollution.
107. Powers of the Minister to make regulations to prevent and
control pollution.
108. Integrated pollution prevention and control.
2004 5 
6 No. 20 Environmental Mana1ement 2004
109. Prohibition of water pollution.
110. Prohibition to discharge hazardous substances, chemicals
materials, oil, etc.
111. Duty to ketp abreast with technological changes.
112. Duty to disclose information to prevent pollution.
113: "Prohibition notices Ort prescri~d process or activity . .
PART IX
WASTE MANAGEMENT
(a} Management of Solid ·w,iste
114. Duty of local government to manage and minimize solid waste.
115. Disposai of solid waste from markets, business areas and
institutions.
116. Storage of solid waste from industries.
117. Solid waste collection in urban and rural areas.
118. Waste transfer stations.
. 119. Final disposal of solid waste; · .
(b) Management of Litter
120.- Interpretation with regarcho management of litter. . .
121. Control of litter in public places.
122. Occupiers of private land to clear litter
(c) Management of Liquid Waste
123. On site disposal of liquid waste.
124. Transportation and disposal of liquid waste.
125. - Treatment of liquid waste. . 126. Liquid waste disposal.
127. Control and monitoring of sewerage system.
128. Industrial liquid waste.
· 129. Stonn water management.
(d) Management of Gaseous Waste
130. Gaseous wastes from dwelling houses.
131. Control of industrial gaseous waste.
132. Gaseous and particulate wastes from vehicles. 
No. 20 Environmental Management
(e) Management of Hazardous Waste
133. Importation of hazardous waste.
134. Duty of local government authority in relation to hazardous
waste.
135. Movement of hazardous waste.
136. Environmental lmpactAssessnient for hazardous waste.' ..
137. Final disposal of health care wastes.
138. Disposal of other wastes.
139. General power of local government authc:>rities to ~ize waste.
140.
141.
142.
143.
144 ... -
145.
146.
147.
. 148.·-
149.
150.
PARTX
ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY STANDARDS
Formulation and.approval of environmental quality standards.
Compliance with standards, etc.
Enforcement of environmental quality standards.
Water quality standards.
Standards for discharge of effluent into water.
Air quality standards.
Standards for the control of noxious smells.
Standards for the control of noise and vibration pollution.
Standards for sub-sonic vibrations .
Standards for minimization of radiation.
Soil quality standards.
PART XI
ENVIRONMENTAL RESTORATION, EASEMENTS
AND CONSERVATION ORDERS
(a) Restoration Orders
151. Environmental restoration order.
152. Contents of environmental restoration order.
153. Service of environmental restoration order.
154. Advice before issuing environmental restoration order.
155. Duration of environmental restoration order.
(b) Easements Orders
156. Environmental easements and conservation order.
157. Application for environmental easements.
158. Enforcement of environmental easements.
159. Registration of environmental easements.
160. Compensation for environmental easements,
2004 7 
8 No. 20 Environmental Management 2004
(c) Conservation Orders
161. Imposition of environmental conservation order.
PART XII
ANALYSIS AND RECORDS
162. Designation of laboratories for analysis and taking of samples.
163. Designation of analysts and reference analysts.
164. Certificate of analysis and its effect.
165. Record keeping of matters impacting on the environment.
166. Annual submission of records.
167. Disclosure of analytical results.
168. Environmental responsibilities of the Government Chemist.
169. Prescribing mode of cooperation on chemical pollutants.
170. Requirement to keep the Council infonned.
171.. Environmental records on mining activities .
. PART XIII
ENvlRONMENTAL INFORMATION, EDUCATION AND RESEARCH
172. Freedom of access to environmental infonnation.
173. Powers of the Council to collect, analyse··and disseminate
environmental infonnation.
174. Central Environmental lnfonnation System.
175. State of the Environment Report.
176. Environmental education and awareness.
177. Environmental research.
PART XIV
PuBLIC PARTICIPATION IN ENVIRONMENTAL
DECISION MAKINO
178. Public participation in environmental decision making.
PART XV
.INTERNATIONAL AGREEMENTS
179. International Agreements on Environment.
180. Transboundary environmental management programmes.
181. Establishment of national offices and focal points. 
No. 20 Environmental Management 2004 9
PART XVI
COMPLIANCE AND ENFORCEMENT
182. Appointment and designation of environmental inspectors.
183. Powers of environmental inspectors.
184. Offences relating to environmental impact assessment.
185. Offences relating to records.
186. Offences relating to environmental standards.
187. Offences relating to pollution.
188. Offeilces·rela:ting· to biologi"cal"diversity. · - · · ··
189. Offences relating to environmentals restoration, easements
and conservation orders.
190. Offences relating to litter.
191. General penalty. ·
192. Civil liability.
193. Forfeiture, cancellation, community service and other orders.
194. Compounding of offences.
195. Prevention order to protect the environment.
196. Protection order against activities adverse on the environment.
197. Emeigency protection order.
198. Environmental compliance order.
199. Cost order.
200. Offences in relation to environmental inspectors.
201. Liability of managers of bodies corporate.
202. Right of individual and legal persons to sue.
203. Defences.
PART XVII
ENVIRONMENTAL APPEALS TRIBUNAL
204. Establishment and composition of the Tribunal.
205. Sources of funds for the Tribunal.
206. Jurisdiction of the Tribunal.
207. Proceedings of the Tribunal.
208. Awards of the Tribunal.
209. Appeals to the High Court.
210. Immunity of members of the Tribunal.
211. Renumeration of members of the Tribunal.
212. Appointment of the Registrar. 
10 . . No. 20 Environmental Management 2004
PART XVIII
NATIONAL ENVIRONMENTAL TRUST FuNo
213. Establishment of the National Environmental Trust Fund.
214. Objectives of the Fund, .. . ..
215. Composition and administration of the .Fund.
216. Annual accounts and audit of the Fund.
PART XIX
FINANCIAL PROVISIONS'
217. Sources of funds of the Council.
218. Bank account and appropriation of funds,
219. Power to raise and guarantee loans. .
220. Investments by the Council.
221 . Annual and supplementary budget.
222. Ac90unt$ and audit.
223. Annual Report.
PART XX
.. GENERAL AND .TRANSITIONAL PR.OVISJONS
224. Act to bind the Government.
225. Saving over recourse to civil litigation.
226. Range of remedies to the injured.
227. Environmental performance bond.
228. Right to compensation.
229. Environmental emergency preparedness.
230. Regulations. ·
231. Repeal and savings.
232. Inconsistency with other legislation.
233. Act to be translated into Kiswahili. 
No. 20 Environmental Management
SCHEDULES
FIRST SCHEDULE
CoMPOsmoN, MEETING AND PROCEDURE OF nm
NATIONAL ENVIRONMBNTAL ADVISORY COMMITI'EE
SECOND SCHEDULE
PROCEDURE FOR nm CONDUCT OF BusINESS BY nm BOARD
TIDRDSCHEDULE
TYPE OF PROJECTS WHICH REQUIRE ElA
FOURTH SCHEDULE
COMPOSITION AND PR,OC:EEDINOS QF THE BoARD OF
TRUSTEES OF nm FUND
2004 11 
12 No. 20 Environmental Management 2004
Short
title
Commencement
and
application
No.
•
20 OF 2004
(). I ' I ASSENT,
ts-£,-fCvv\M.,a,._, ~ /L /i,.. a.. ······0 ·····························{.':.~4-~'
gr ,t._ 'D.Ld-.ML1President
.. .. .. : ......... ! ..... "::" .. :.:.:-:-:7.~r··~·
An Act to provide for leaal and institutional framework for
sustainable management of environment; to outline
principles for management, impact and risk assessments,
prevention and control of pollution, waste management,
environmental quality standards, public participation,
compliance and enforcement; to provide basis for
implementation of international instruments on environment;
to provide . for implementation of the National
Environment Policy; to repeal the National Environment
Management Act, 1983 and provide for continued existence of
the National Environment Management Council; to
provide for establishment of the National Environmental
Trust Fund and to provide for other related matters.
[ ...................... , ..... , .. '' ''' '' .................. ]
ENACTED by Parliament of the United Republic of Tanzania.
PART I
PRELIMINARY PROVISIONS
1. This Act may be cited as the Environmental Management Act,
2004.
2.-( 1) ,This Act shall come into operation on such date as the
Minister may, by notice published in the Gazette, appoint.
(2) This Act shall apply to Mainland Tanzania.
3. In this Act, unless the context requires otherwise-
No.20 Environmental Management 2004 13
"Act" means the Environmental Management Act, 2004;
"analysis" means the testing or examination of any matter, substance
or process for the purpose of detennining its composition or qualities
or its effect (whether physical, chemical or biological) on any
segment of the environment or examination of emissions or recording
of noise or sub-sonic vibrations to. determine the level or other
characteristics of the noise or sub-sonic vibration or its effect on
any segments of the environment;
"analyst" means an analyst appointed or designated under section 163;
"beneficial use'' means··a use· of the environment or any element or
segment of the environment that is conducive to public health,
welfare or safety and which requires protection from the effects of
wastes, discharges, emissions and deposits;
''biological diversity" means the variability among living organisms
from all sources including, terrestrial ecosystems, aquatic ecosystems
and the ecological complexes of which they are part; this includes
diversity within species, among species and of ecosystems;
''biological resources" include genetic resources, organisms or parts
thereof, populations, or any other biotic component or ecosystems
with actual or potential use or value for humanity;
''Board" means the Board. of Directors of the National Environment
Management Council referred to under section 19(1); .
''biosafety" means avoidance of risk to the protection of the environment
and to human health, as a result of the use for research and
commerce of genetically modified organisms;
"burdened land" means any land upon which an environmental
easement has been imposed;
"chemical" means a chemical substance in any form whether by itself
or in a mixture or preparations, whether manufactured or derived
from nature and for the purpose of thj.s Act includes industrial
chemicals, pesticides, fertilizers and drugs;
"Council" means the National Environment Management Council
referred to under section 16;
"decision-making processes" means institutionalized processes or
procedures initiated by public or private institutions with the
intention of making decisions with potential to have socio-economic
and environmental consequences;
"developer" means a person who is developing a project which is
subject to an environmental impact assessment process under this
Act;
Interpretation 
14 No. 20 Environmental Management 2004
''Director of Environment" means a Director of Environment appointed
pursuant to section 14;
"Director .General" means the. Director General of the National
Environment Management Council;
"ecosystem" means a dynamic complex of plant, animal, micro-organism
.... communities and theit·nott-tiving environment interactihg as a
functional unit;
"effluent" means gaseous waste, water or liquid or other fluid of
.dpmestic, agricultural,~. or ind.u~al otjgin trea~ or untreated and
discharged.directly or indirectly into the environment; ·
"element" in relation to the environment means any of the principal
constituent parts of the environment including water, atmosphere,
soil, vegetation, climate, sound, odour, aesthetics, fish and wildlife;
"environment" includes the physical factors· of the surroundings of
human beings including air, land, water, climate, sound, light,
odour, taste, micro-organism, the biological factors of animals and
plants, cultural resources and the social economic factor of ~sthetics
and includes both the natural and the built environment" and the
way they· interact;
"environmental audit" means the systematic, documented, periodic
and objectiye;evall18tjon of how wen ~nviro~ental org~ization,
management and equipment are performing in conserving or
preserving the environment;
"environmental easement" means an· easement created in pursuance of
section 156;
"environmental education" includes the process of recognizing values
and clarifying concepts in order to develop skills and attitudes
necessary to understand· and appreciate the inter-relationship
· among human beings, their culture and biophysical surroundings;
"environmental impact assessment" means a systematic examination
conducted to determine whether or not a programme, activity or
project will have any adverse impacts on the environment;
"Environmental Inspector" means an inspector appointed under or
designated pursuant to section 182;
"environmental management" includes the protection, conservation
and sustainable use of various elements or components of the
environment;
"environmental monitoring" means the continuous or periodic
determination of actual and potential effects of any activity or
phenomenon on the environment whether short-term or long-term; 
No. 20 Environmental Management 2004 15
"environmental planning" means planning that takes into account
environmental exigencies;
"environmental resources" includes the resources of the air, land,
flora, fauna and water together with their aesthetical qualities;
"environmental restoration order" means an order issued under section
151; -
"environmentally friendly" includes any phenomenon or activity that
does not cause hann or degradation to the environment;
"environmental health" means and comprises of aspects of human
:- . 'health.and disease that are deteniiined by factors iri the environment; . .
"ex - situ conservation" means the conservation of components of
biological diversity outside their natural habitats;
"Fund" means the National Environmental Trust Fund established by
· section 213(1); -
"gaseous wastes" means gaseous emissions referred to under section
132(1) and includes other emissions which may be prescribed;
"genetic material" me3:Ds any material of plant, animal, microbial or
other organism containing functional units of heredity;
"Genetically Modified Organism (GMO)" means any biological entity
capable of replication or transfer of genetic information, and
includes plant, animals, bacteria and all other kinds of
micro-organisms,' cell cultures, viruses, plasmids and other kirids
of vectors, created and propagated; by means of cell or gene
technology; in which the genetic material has been altered in a way
that does not occur naturally;
"genetic resources" means genetic material of actual or potential
value;
"good environmental practice" means practice. that is in accordance
with the prpvisions of this Act or any other relevant law;
''hazardous substance" means any chemical, waste, gas, medicine,
drug, plant, animal or micro organism which is likely to be injurious to
human health, life or the environment;
''hazardous waste" means any solid, liquid, gaseous or sludge waste
which by reason of its chemical reactivity, environmental or human
hazardousness, its infectiousness, toxicity, explosiveness and
corrosiveness is harmful to human health, life or environment;
"industrial waste" means waste emanating from processing industries
or non-processing industries that is the source of energy, water,
treatment plants or communication and includes any other solid
wastes referred to under part IX; 
16 No. 20 Environmental Management 2004
Act
No.3
of2003
"in-situ conservation" means conservation of biological diversity
within the natural ecosystem and habitat of the biological o~ism;
"Minister" means the Minister responsible for matters relating to the
environment;
"noise" means any pollution caused by sound that is intrinsically
objectionable or that may cause adverse effect in human health, life
or the environment and includes sound that may be prescribed by
the National Environmental Standards Committee;
. "ozone layer'' means the layer of the atmospheric zone above the planetary
booodary as defmed in the \lienna Convention for the Protection of
the Ozone Layer, 1985;
"participation" means opportunity and ability to influence thq outcome
of a decision-making process;
"Persistent Oiganic Pollutants (POPs)" has the meaning fSCribed to
them under the Industrial and Consumer Chemicals (~anagement
and Control) Act, 2003.
"polluter-pays principle" means a mechanism whereby the . cost of
cleaning up any element of the environment damaged by pollution,
compensating victims of pollution, cost of beneficial uses lost as a
result of an act of pollution and other costs that are connected with
or incidental to the foregoing, is to be paid or bome by the person
convi~ted of pollution under this Act or any other.applicable law;
"pollution" means any direct or indirect alteration of the physical, thennal,
chemical, biological, or radio-active properties of any part of the
environment by dischaiging, emitting, or depositing of wastes so as
to adversely affect any beneficial use, to cause a condition which is
hazardous to public health, safety or welfare, or to animals, birds,
wildlife, fish or aquatic life, or to plants or to cause contravention
of any condition, limitation, or restriction which is the subject to a
licence under this Act;
''premises" include measuages, buildings, lands, and hereditaments in
every tenure and machinery, plant or vehicle used in connection
with any trade carried on at any premises;
''Prior lnfonnation Chemicals" means hazardous chemicals and pesticides
that require control in international trade as provided by the
Rotterdam Convention and includes any other chemicals or
pesticides which have been designated as such under any other
international agreement to which the United Republic is a party;
''project" includes any project, programme or policy that leads to projects
which may have an impact on the environment;
''proponent" means a person proposing or executing a project, programme 
No. 20 Environmental Management 2004 17
or an undertaking specified in the Third Schedule;
''public" means individuals, civil society organit.ations and institutions,
community based organizations, public and private institutions;
"radiation" has the meaning ascribed to it under the Atomic Energy
Act, 2003 and includes ionising radiation and any other radiation
"likely to have adverse effects on human health, life or the environment;
"risk assessment" means the evaluation of the direct and indirect risks
to human and animal health, the environment, biological diversity
and to the socio-economic conditions and ethical values of the
. country or its ·populace which may be posed by the import,
contained use, deliberate release or placing on the marlcet of
GMOs or its products;
"segment" in relation to the environment means any portion or
portions of the environment expressed in terms of volume, space,
area, quantity, quality or time or any combination thereof;
"sewage" means a combination of excreta, urine, and sullage and
liquid wastes from . homesteads, institutio~, commercial and
industrial processes and.operations; .
"soil" includes earth, sand, rock, shales, mineral, vegetation, and the
flora and fauna in the soil and derivatives thereof such as dust;
"solid. waste _f:lisposal" means the final. stage ~ solid ~ . managem_e~t .
system;
"solid waste" means non-liquid materials arising from domestic,
street, commercial, industrial and agricultural activities; and
includes refuse or garbage, non-liquid materials arising from
construction and demolition activities, garden trimmings and mining
operations, dead animals and abandoned cars scraps;
"solid waste management" means an essential service that is provided
to protect the environment and public health, promote hygiene,
recover materials, avoid waste, reduce waste quantities, decrease
emission and residuals and prevent spread of diseases;
"standard" means the limits of discharge or emissions established
under this Act or under regulations made pursuant to this Act or any "
other written law;
"sustainable development" means development that meets the needs of
the present generation without compromising the ability of future
generations to meet their needs by maintaining the carrying capacity
of the supporting ecosystems;
"sustainable use" means present use of the environment or natural
resources which does not compromise the ability to use the same
ActNo. 7
of 2003 
18 No. 20 Environmental Management 2004
Right to
clean,
safe and
healthy
environment
Right to
-bring an
action on
environment
by futlU'e generations or degrade the cmrying capacity of supporting
ecosystems;
'lrade" means any trade, business or undertaking whether originally
carried on at fixed premises or at varying places which may result
in the discharge of substances and energy and includes any activity
· prescribed to be a trade, business or undertaking-for the purposes
of this Act;
'lransfer stations" with respect to solid waste management, means
.are~ of land set aside for collection of solid waste generated from
various sources before their final disposal;
''Tribunal" means the Environmental Appeals Tribunal established
under section 204;
''waste" means any matter whether liquid, solid, gaseous or radioactive,
which is discharged, emitted or -deposited in the environment in
such volume, composition or manner likely to cause an alteration
of the environment, and includes such waste as may be prescribed
under this Act; and
''water" focludes drinking water, river, stream, water-course, reservoir,
well, dam, canal, channel, lake, swamp, open dram, or 1.U1derground
water.
PART II
GENERAL PRINCIPLES
4.-( l) Every person living in Tanzania shall have a right to clean,
safe and healthy environment.
(2) The right to clean, safe and healthy environment shall include
the right of access by any citizen to the various public elements or
segments of the environment for recreational, educational, health,
spiritual, cultural and economic purposes.
5.-(l) Every person may, where a right referred to in section 4 is
threatened as a result of an act or omission which is likely to cause
harm to human health or the environment, bring an action against the
person whose act or omission is likely to cause harm to human health
or the environment. 
No. 20 Environmental Management 2004 19
(2) The action referred to in subsection (1) may seek to-
(a) prevent, stop or discontinue any activity or omission,
which is likely to cause harm to human health or the
environment;
(b) compel any public officer. to take measures to prevent or
. discontinue · any act or omission, which is likely to cause
harm to human health or environment;
(c) require that any on-going activity or omission be subjected
to an environmental audit or monitoring; (d) require the person whose activity or omission·is·likely to
cause harm to human health or the environment, to take
measures to· protect the environment or human health;
(e) compel the persons responsible for the environmental
degradation to restore the degraded environment as far as
practicable to its condition immediately prior to the
damage; and
(f) provide compensation for any victim of hann or omission
and the cost of beneficial uses .lost as a result of an
activity that has caused harm to human health or the
environment.
(3) The Tribunal, court and any person exercising jurisdiction
under this Act ·shall, in relation: to any decision, order, exercise of any
power or perfonnance of any function, be guided by the following
principles of environment and sustainable development-
(a) the precautionary principle;
(b) the polluter pays principle;
( c) the principle of eco-system integrity;
(d) the principle of public participation in the development
policies, plans and processes for the management of the
environment;
(e) the principle of access to justice;
(f) the principle of inter-generational equity and intra-generational
equity; .
(g) the principle of international co-operation in management
of environmental resources shared by two or more states; and
(h) the principle of common but differentiated responsibilities.
6. Every person living in Tanzania shall have a stake and a duty to
safeguard and enhance the environment and to infonn the relevant
authority of any activity and phenomenon that may affect the environment
significantly.
Duty to
protect
the environment 
20 No. 20 Environmental Management 2004
Principles of
environmental
manage7.-(1) The objective of this Act is to provide for and promote the
enhancement, protection, conservation and management of the
environment.
ment (2) In the promotion of the objective referred to under subsection
( 1 ), . this Act provides a legal framework necessary for co-ordinating
hannonious and conflicting activities with a view to integrating such
activities into an overall sustainable environmental management
sys~m by providing key technical support to Sector Ministries.
(3) In achieving the objective of this Act, every person exercising
powers under this Act shall observe the principle that:
(a) the environment is the common heritage of present and
future generations;
(b) adverse effects be prevented or minimised through long-term
integrated planning and coordination, integration
and co-q>eratioo of effi>rts, winch coosider1he entire envilooment
as' a whole entity; . . .. . . . . ...
(c) the precautionary principle, which requires that where
there is risk of serious irreversible adverse effects occurring,
a lack of scientific certainty should not prevent o~ impair
the taking of precautionary measures to protect the
environment;
(d) the polluter pays principle, which requires that any person
causing adverse effect on the environment shall be
required to pay in full social and environmental costs
of avoiding, mitigating, and or remedying those adverse
effects;
'(e) the public participation principle, which requires the
involvement of the people in the development of policies,
plans and processes for the management of the environment;
(f) access to environmental information, which enables
citizens to make informed personal choices and
encourages improved performance by industry and
government;
(g) access to justice, which gives individuals, the public and
interest groups of persons the opportunity to protect their
rights to participation and to contest decisions that do not
take their interest into account; 
No. 20 Environmental Management 2004 21
(h) the generation of waste be minimised, wherever practicable,
waste should, in order of priority, be re-used, recycled,
recovered and disposed of safely in a manner that avoids
creating adverse effects or if this is not practicable, is least
likely to cause adverse effects;
(i) the environment and natural resources are vital to peoples
livelihood, to be used sustainably in order to achieve
poverty reduction, and social economic development;
(j) non-renewable natural resources only be used prudently,
taking into account the consequences for the present and
the future generations; and
(k) renewable natural resources and ecosystems only be used
in a manner that is sustainable and does not prejudice
their viability and integrity.
( 4) With regard to observance of the principles stipulated under
subsection ( 1 ), the Minister shall be overall responsible for fostering
co-ordination between the Government, local government authorities
and other bodies engaged in environmental management as a
cross-cutting issue and shall in that respe'ct maintain a system
of collaboration, . consultation and co-operation with any person having
functions provided under this Act.
8. Any person performing a public function who, in the course of
performing that function, is required to take any action, make a
decision, create, revise, or implement any policy, plan, strategy,
legislation, guideline or procedure, that is likely to affect the
management, conservation or enhancement of the environment or the
sustainable management of natural and cultural resources shall have
regard to principles of environmental management.
9. All persons exercising powers under this Act or under any other
written law having a bearing on the management of the environment
shall strive to promote and have regard to the National Environmental
Policy.
Obligation to
give
effect to
environmental
principles
Promotion of
the
National
Environmental
Policy 
22 No. 20 Environmental Management 2004
Environment
Day
Establishment and
composition of
members
ofthe
Committee
Functions of
the
National
Environmental
Advisory
Committee
10.-(1) The Minister shall designate a special day to be known as
Environment Day wherein events and activities will be organised to
highlight the objectives of the day, purposes of the Act and to encourage
willingness to pursue activities related to environmental conservation,
protection and management.
(2) The Government, the Council and all relevant institutions shall
make efforts to carry out events which support the spirit and objective
of the Environment Day.
PARTill
ADMINISTRATION AND INSTITUTIONAL
ARRANGEMENT
(a) National Environmental Advisory Committee
11.-(1) There is established the National Environmental Advisory
Committee which shall be an advisory body to the Minister.
(2) The National Environmental Advisory Committee shall be
composed of members whose experience shall reflect the various
fields of environmental management in the public, private sector and
the civil society.
(3) The National Environmental Advisory Committee shall consist
of the members, specified in the First Schedule to this Act.
12. The National Environmental Advisory Committee shall advise
the Minister or any sector ministry on any matter which may be
referred to it, and in particular, it shall -
(a) examine any matter which may be referred to it by the
Minister or any sector Ministry relating to the protection
and management of the environment and shall recommend
to the Minister or the sector Ministry,· as the case may be,
such action as is necessary for achieving the objectives of
this Act;
(b) advise the Minister on any matter in connection with
restocking and limitation of stock;
(c) advise the Minister on matters relating to watering, grazing,
depasturing and moving stock; 
No. 20 Environmental Management 2004 23
(d) make recommendation to the Minister ,where there is
degradation of the environment;
( e) review and advise on any environmental standards,
guidelines and regulations which are to be made pursuant
to the provisions of this Act;
(f) receive and deliberate reports from sector ministries on the
protection and management of the environment under this
Act and other written laws; and
(g) perform such other environmental advisory services to the
Minister as are necessary.
(b) Minister Responsible for Environment
13.-( 1) The Minister shall be overall responsible for matters relating to
environment and shall in that respect be responsible for articulation of
policy guidelines necessary for the promotion, protection and sustainable
management of environment in Tanzania.
(2) The Minister may issue general guidelines to the Sector
Ministries, Government Departments, the Council, National
Environment Advisory Committee, City, Municipal or District
Environmental Management Committee, agency or any other public or
private institution necessary for the purposes of implementation of or
giving effect to the provisions of this Act.
(3) The Minister. may designate and shall, where appropriate,
direct any of the institutions referred to under subsection (2) and within
specified time, to perform any function or do any activity or desist
from performing any function or doing any activity as a result of
which the environment or part of it is or may be seriously endangered
or detrimentally affected.
(4) · Where the Minister has given a directive pursuant to subsection
(3) to any of the bodies in respect to which the directive was issued
shall comply or give effect to such directive.
(c) Director of Environment
14. There shall be the Director of Environment and such other officers
as may be necessary for proper discharge of the functions of the office
of the Director of Environment.
Powers
ofthe
Minister
Director
of Environment 
24 No. 20 Environmental Management 2004
Functions
ofthc
Director
of
Environs
mcnt
The
Council
15. On matters pertaining to the management of the environment,
the Director of Environment shall:
(a) coordinate various environment management activities
being undertaken by other agencies and promote the
integration of environment considerations into development
policies, plans, programmes, strategies, projects and
undertake strategic environmental assessment with a view
to ensuring the proper management and rational utilization
of environmental resources on a sustainable basis for the
improvement of the quality of human life in Tanzania;
(b) advise the Government on legislative and other measures
for the management of the environment or the
implementation of the relevant international agreements
in the field of environment;
( c) advise the Government on international environmental
agreements to which Tanzania should be a member or
withdraw its membership;
(d) monitor and assess activities, being carried out by relevant
agencies in order to ensure that the environment is not
degraded by such activities, environmental management
objectives are adhered to and adequate early warning on
impending environmental emergency is given;
( e) prepare and issue a report on the state of the environment
in Tanzania;
(f) coordinare issues relating to articulatioo and implementation of
environmental management aspects of other sector
policies; and
(g) coordinate issues relating to articulation and implementation
of the National Environmental Policy.
( d) National Environment Management Council
16.-(1) There shall be a Council to be known as the National
Environment Management Council, also to be known by acronym
"NEMC".
(2) The Council shall-
(a) be a body corporate with perpetual succession and
common seal;
(b) in its corporate naine, be capable of suing and being sued;
and 
No. 20 Environmental Management 2004 25
( c) for and in connection with the purposes of this Act, be
capable of holding, purchasing and otherwise acquiring
and disposing of movable or immovable property.
17.-( 1) The object and purpose for which the Council is established is
to undertake enforcement, compliance, review and monitoring of
environmental impact assessment and in that regard, shall facilitate
public participation in environmental decision making, exercise general
supervision and coordination over all matters relating to the environment
assigned to the Council, under this Act or any other written law.
(2) The Council shall prepare and submit to the Minister a bi-annual
report concerning how it has implemented the provisions of this Act
and fulfilled the objects and the purpose for which it was established.
18.-(1) The Council may, for the purposes of canying out its functions
under this Act, do all such acts as may appear to it to be requisite,
advantageous or convenient for or in connection with the carrying out
of those functions or to be incidental to their proper performance and
may carry on any activities in that behalf either alone or in association
with any other person or body of persons,
(2) Without prejudice to subsection (1), the Council shall, in
collaboration with relevant sector ministries:
(a) carry on environmental audit in relation to section 101;
(b) carry out surveys which will assist in the proper management
and conservation of the environment;
( c) undertake and co-ordinate research, investigation and surveys
in the field of environment and collect, and disseminate
information about the findings of such research, investigation
or survey;
( d) review and · recommend for approval of environment
impact statements;
( e) identify projects and programmes or types of projects and
programmes, for which environmental audit or environmental
monitoring must be conducted under this Act;
(f) enforce and ensure compliance of the national environmental
quality standards;
Object
for
establishment
ofthe
Council
Functions
ofthe
Council 
26 No. 20 Environmental Management 2004
Board of
the
Council
(g) initiate and evolve procedures and safeguards for the
prevention of accidents which may cause environmental
degradation and evolve remedial measures where accidents
occur;
. (h) undertake; in co-operation with relevant sector Ministries
programmes intended to enhance environmental education
and public awareness about the need for sound environmental
management as well as for enlisting public support and
encouraging the effort made by other entities in that
regard;
(i) publish and disseminate manuals, codes or guidelines
relating to environmental management and prevention or
abatement of environmental degradation;
G) render advice and technical support, where possible, to
entities engaged in natural resources and environmental
management so as to enable them to carry out their
responsibilities; and
(k) perform such other functions as the Minister may assign
to it or as are incidental or conducive to the exercise by it
of any or all of the functions provided under this Act.
(3) Any person who is aggrieved by the decision of the Council
under this section may appeal to the Minister.
19.-(1) There shall be a Board of Directors of the Council.
(2) The Council shall be managed by the Board, which shall
consist of-
(a) the Chairman who shall be appointed by the President;
(b) the Director of Environment; and
(c) seven members, appointed by the Minister at least two of
whom being women.
(3) The Director-General shall be the Secretary to the Board. 
No. 20 Environmental Management 2004 27
(4) No person shall be appointed under subsection (2)(a) and (c)
unless such person. holds at least a degree of a recognized university in
the fields of environmental law, environmental health science, natural
resource management or a relevant social science or, in lieu thereof,
such person shall have proven experience and knowledge in the field
of environment management.
(5) The members referred to under paragraph (a) and (c) of
subsection (2) shall be appointed at different times so that the respective
expiry dates of their terms of office shall fall vacant at different times.
20.-(1) The Board shall meet at least three times a year.
(2) Procedure for the conduct of business by the Board and
termination or cessation of membership to the Board shall be as
provided for under the Second Schedule to this Act.
21.-(1) There shall be an office of the Director-General.
(2) The Director-General shall be appointed by the President from
among persons who, in addition to holding a degree from a recognized
university in the fields of environmental law, environmental health
science, environmental engineering, natural resource management, or
any other relevant discipline has at least ten years working experience
in the relevant field.
(3) The Director-General shall be the chief executive officer of the
Council and shall, subject to the provisions of this Act, be responsible
for the day to day management of the affairs of the Council.
(4) The Director-General shall hold office for a term of five years
and may be eligible for reappointment for another term.
(5) The Director-General shall be responsible to the Board for the
proper administration and management of the function and affairs of
the Council and shall discharge other duties as may be assigned to him
by the Board.
( 6) The Director-General, staff and employees of the Council shall
be paid salaries and allowances as may be determined by the
Government.
Conduct
of business and
affairs of
the
Council
Appointment of
the
Director
General 
28 No. 20 Environmental Management 2004
Staff and
employees of
the
Council
General
powers
of the
Council
Powers
of the
Council
in
respect
of other
agencies
22. The Council may appoint such officers or other staff as are
necessary for the proper dischal'ge of its functions under this Act or
any other written law and upon such tenns and conditions of service
as the Board may detennine.
23. The Council shall have all powers necessary for the proper
perfonnance of its functions wtder this Act and in particular, but without
prejudice to the generality of the foregoing, the Council shall have
powerto-
(a) control, supervise and administer the assets of the Council
in such manner as may best promote the pwpose for which
the Council is established;
(b) detennine the provisions to be made for capital and recurrent
expenditure and for reserves of the Council;
(c) receive any grants, gifts, donations or endowments and
make disbursements from grants, gifts, donations or
endowments;
( d) enter into association with other bodies or Oiganisation
within or outside Tanzania as it may consider desirable or
appropriate and in furtherance of the purpose for which the
Council is established;
( e) open a bank account or bank accounts for the funds of the
Council; and
(f) invest any funds of the Cowtcil which are not immediately
required for its purposes in the manner provided for in
section 220.
24.-(1) Subject to subsection (2), the Council may, after giving
reasonable notice of its intention so to do, direct any agency to
perform, within such time and in such manner as it shall specify, any
of the duties imposed upon any agency by or under this Act or any
other written law, in relation to enforcement and compliance and if
such agency fails to comply with the direction, the Council may itself
perform or cause to be perfonned the duties in question, and the
expense incurred by it in so doing shall be a civil debt recoverable by
the Council from that agency. 
No. 20 Environmental Management 2004 29
(2) The Council shall seek and obtain written authorization of the
Minister before exercising power under this section.
25. The Council shall have and may exercise all necessary powers
required to bring about compliance with any directive issued by it and
may, in that respect, take or cause to be taken such measures including
bringing action in the court of law or the Tribunal.
26. Subject to · this Act, the Council may delegate to any sector
Ministry, environmental management body, employee or agent of the
Council, the exercise of any of the powers or the perfonnance of any
of the functions or duties of the Council under this Act.
27.-(1) There shall be a common seal of the Council as may be
detennined by the Board.
(2) The common seal of the Council shall not be affixed to any
instrument except in the presence of the Chainnan or the Secretary or
some other officer of the Council and at least one member of the
Board.
28. No matter or thing done by the Board, member of the Board,
employee or agent of the Council shall, if done in good faith during
execution of the functions, powers or duties of the Council, render the
Board, member, employee or agent personally liable to any action,
claim or demand in any way.
29. For avoidance of conflict of interest, partiality and for the
purpose of good practice, no employee or staff of the Council, or
agent of the Council or any person having contractual agreement with
the Council to conduct reviews of the environmental impact assessment
shall carry out environmental impact studies consequent upon compliance
with the requirement of any provision of this Act.
Powers
ofthe
Council
to ensure
compliance
Performance of
the functions of
the
Council
by other
bodies
Common
seal of
the
Council
Iooemnity
ofthe
Board,
member,
etc.,
from
personal
liability.
Conflict
of interest 
· 30 No. 20 Environmental Management 2004
Establishment of
sector
env.ironment
section
Functions
of sector
environment
section
(e) Sector Ministries
30. There shall be established in each Ministry a sector environmental
section, which shall have such functions and duties as assigned to them
under this Act including-
(a) responsibility for ensuring compliance by the · sector
Ministry with the requirements of this Act;
(b) responsibility for ensuring all environmental matters
contained in otherwritten law falling under sector ministry
are implemented and report of their implementation is
submitted to the Director of Environment; and
( c) liason with the Director of Environment and the Council
on matters involving environment and all matters with
respect to which cooperation or shared responsibility is
desirable or required under this Act.
31.-(1) · Each sector environmental section shall be required-
(a) to advise on and, in collaboration with other bodies,
implement the policies of the Government on the
protection and management of the environment; .
(b) to coordinat.e the activities related to the environment within
the Ministry;
( c) to ensure that environmental concerns are integrated into
the ministry or departmental development planning and
project implementation in a way which protects the
environment;
( d) to collaborate with other institutions or agencies, evaluate
existing and proposed policies and legislation and
recommend measures to ensure that those policies and
legislation take adequate.· account of effects on the
environment;
(e) to prepare and coordinate the implementation of
environmental action plans at the national and local levels
as required under this Act;
(f) to promote public awareness of environmental issues
through educational programmes and the dissemination of
information; 
No. 20 Environmental Management 2004 31
(g) to refer to the Council any matter related to the enforcement
for the purposes of this Act;
(h) to carry out such other functions as are necessary to comply
with the purposes of this Act;
(i) to undertake analysis of environmental impact of sectoral
legislation, regulations, policies, plans, strategies
and programs through strategic environmental assessment;
(j) to ensure that sectoral standards are environmentally
sound;
(k) to oversee the preparation and implementation of
Environmental Impact Assessments required for investments
in the sector;
(l) to ensure compliance with various regulations, guidelines
and procedures issued by the Minister; and
(m) in conjunction with the Ministry responsible for
local government, to provide environmental advice and
technical support to district level staff worlcing in the sector.
(2) Every sector Ministry shall carry out its functions and duties
in connection with the environment as prescribed in any other law
provided that such law does not conflict with the provisions of this
Act.
32.-(1) A sector Ministry charged with the management of any
segment of the environment under any other law shall through the
Sector. Environmental Coordinator submit to the Director of
Environment-
(a) bi-annual report concerning the state of that segment of the
environment and the measures taken by that sector
Ministry to maintain or improve the environment;
(b) a review of environmental law falling under the Ministry
and the extent of their implementation; and
( c) through its environm~nt section such other report as may
be required by the Director of Environment.
Submission
of sector
Miristrics
. report 
32 No. 20 -Environmental Management 2004
Appointment or
- designation of a
_ sector
environment
coordinator
Regional
coordination on
environmental
management
Appointment or
designation ofa
regional
environment
management
expert
(2) Where a sector Ministry suspects or detects any contravention
of an environmental law beyond its line of responsibility it shall
immediately, through its environmental section, inform the Director
General and the relevant sector Ministry.
33.-( 1) There -shall be appointed or designated by each sector
Ministry a person to be known as Sector Environment Coordinator.
(2) Sector Environment Coordinator shall be charged with the
following functions-
( a) coordinating all activities and performance of the
functions relating to the environment;
(b) prevention and control of any activity likely to cause or
bring about environmental degradation;
(c) report on the implementation and enforcement of
environmental provisions of laws mlling under the jurisdiction
of the sector; and
( d) provide a link between the sector Ministry in which he is
employed with the Director of Environment and the
Council.
(3) The Sector Environment Coordinator shall be appointed or
designated from among officers within each of the sector Ministry and
shall be a person who possesses adequate knowledge in environmental
management.
(I) Regional Secretariat
34. The Regional Secretariat shall be responsible for co-ordination
of all advice on environmental management in their respective regions
and liaison with the Director of Environment and the Director-General
on the implementation and enforcement of this Act.
35.-(1) There shall be appointed or designated by the Minister
responsible for regional administration a person to be known as the
Regional Environment Management Expert who shall be charged with
the responsibility of advising the local authorities on matters relating
to the implementation and enforcement of this Act.
(2) The Regional Environment Management Expert shall be a link
person between the region in which he is employed with the Director
of Environment and the Director-General. 
No. 20 Environmental Management 2004 33
(g) Local GovernmentAuthorities ·
36.-( 1) There shall be designated or appointed by each City,
Municipal, District and Town Council an Environment Management
Officer who shall be a public officer and shall -
(a) in the case of geographical jurisdiction of a City, the
Environment Management Officer shall be known as the
City Environment Management Officer;
(b) in the case of geographical jurisdiction of a Municipality,
the Environmental Management officer shall be known as
the Municipal Environment Management Officer;
(c) in the case of geographical jurisdiction of a District, the
Management Officer who shall be known as the District
Environment Management Officer; and
(d) in the case of geographical jurisdiction of a town, the
Management Officer who shall be known as the Town
Environment Management Officer.
(2) A person designated or appointed by the City, Municipal,
District or Town Environment Management Officer shall be a holder
of a degree or diploma of a recognized institution of higher learning
and has competence in environmental management.
(3) The Environment Management Officer shall:-
(a) ensure the enforcement of this Act in the respective area to
which he belongs;
(b) advise the environment management committee to which
he belongs on all matters relating to environment;
(c) promote environmental awareness in the area he belongs
on the protection of the environment and the conservation
of natural resources;
( d) gather and manage infonnation on the environment and
utilization of natural resources in the area;
( e) prepare periodic reports on state of the local environment;
(f) monitor the preparation, review and approval of
Environmental impact assessments for local investments;
(g) review by~laws on environmental management and on
sector specific activities related to the environment;
(h) report to the Director of Environment and the
Director-General on the implementation of the Act; and
(i) perfonn such other functions as the local government
authority may from time to time assign him.
FW1Ctions
of local
government
environmental
management
officers 
34 No. 20 Environmental Management 2004
Standing 37.-(1) The Standing Committee on Urban Planning and
Commit- Environment established under subsection (1) of section 42 of the
tees of Local Government (Urban Authorities) Act, 1982 as well as the
local Standing Committee on Economic Affairs Worlcs and Enviroilment
govern- established under subsection (1) of section 74 of the Local ment
authori- Government (District Authorities) Act, 1982 shall each be the City,
tics Municipal or District Environment Management Committee in respect
Act Nos. of the City, Municipal or District· to which each of such Standing
7 and 8 Committee is established.
of 1982
Standing
Committees in
townships,
wards,
villages
and
kitongoji
Act Nos.
7 and 8
ofl982
(2) The City, Municipal and District Environmental Management
Committee shall perform such functions as are provided for under
subsections (1) and (2) of section 55 of the Local Government (Urban
Authorities) Act, 1982 and as the case may be, subsections (1) and (2)
of section 118 of the Local Government (District Authorities) Act,
1982 as well as regulations made under each of such laws.
(3) Without prejudice to subsection (2), the City, Municipal and
District Environmental Management Committee shall also-
(a) perform such additional functions as are prescribed by this
Act or as may, from time to time, be assigned to any one
of such city, municipal or district by the Minister by notice
published in the Gazette; and
(b) carry out all directives given to them by the Minister in
relation to the promotion and enhancement of sustainable
management of the environment.
38.-(1) Each Standing Committee of Economic Affairs, Worlcs and
Environment of a township established under subsection ( 1) of section
96 of the Local Government (District Authorities) Act, 1982, a special
committee formed pursuant to section 107 of the Local Government
(District Authorities) Act, 1982 as well as the Ward Development
Committee established under subsection ( 1) of section 31 of the Local
Government (District Authorities) Act, 1982 shall, in relation to an
area to which it is established-
(a) be responsible for the proper management of the environment
in respect of the area in which they are established;
(b) perform such additional functions as are prescribed by this
Act or as may be assigned to each or any one of them by
the Minister or the Council;
( c) carryout all directives given to them by the Minister in
relation to the promotion and enhancement of sustainable
management of the environment; and 
No. 20 Environmental Management 2004 35
(d) perfonn any other function or discharging any other duty
relating to ancillary or incidental to proper management of
the environment as are provided for under the Local
Government (District) Authorities Act, 1982.
(2) The Village Development Committee of each village shall be
responsible for the proper management of the environment in respect
of the area in which it is established and may perfonn mutatts mutandis
any other functions as are provided for under paragraphs (a), (b), (c)
and (d) of subsection (1).
39. The District Council shall designate for each administrative
area of a township, ward, village, Mtaa and Kitongoji a public officer
who-
(a) in the case of geographical jurisdiction of a township be
known as the Township Environment Management
Officer;
(b) in the case of geographical jurisdiction of a Kitongoji, be
known as the Kitongoji Environment Management
Officer;
( c) in the case of geographical jurisdiction of a Ward, be
known as the Ward Environment Management Officer;
(d) in the case of geographical jurisdiction of a Mtaa, be
known as the Mtaa Environment Management Officer;
and
(e) in the case of geographical jurisdiction of a Village, be
known as the Village Environment Management Officer.
40. The functions of the Township, Ward, Village, Mtaa and
Kitongoji Environment Management Officer shall be to coordinate all
functions and activities geared towards the protection of environment
within the area of the township, ward, mtaa, village and kitongoji or,
as the case may be, within the district to which he is designated.
Designation of
the
Township,
Ward,
Village,
Mtaa and
Kitongoji
Environment
Management
Officer
Functions
ofthe
Township,
Ward,
Village,
Mtaa and
Kitoogoji
Environment
Management
Officer 
36 No. 20 Environmental Management 2004
General
powers
ofthe
City,
Municipal,
District,
Township,
Ward,
.. · Village,
Mtaa and
Kitongoji
Environmental
Management
Committees
Local
government
authorities environmental action
plans
41. Each Environmental Management Committee shall, in relation to
an area to which it is established, have powers to-
(a) initiate inquiries and investigations about any allegation
related to the environment and the implementation or
violation of the provisions of this Act;
(b) require any person to provide information or explanation
about any matter related fu the environment;
( c) resolve conflict among individual persons, companies,
agencies, non governmental organisations, Government
departments or institutions about their respective
functions, duties, mandates, obligations or activities
under this Act;
(d) inspect and examine any premises, street, vehicle, aircraft
or any other place or article which it believes or have
reasonable cause to believes that pollutant or other articles or
substances believes to be pollutant is kept or transported;
( e) require any' person to remove at own cost any article or
substance from any place which it believes such article or
substance may be safely kept or destroyed without causing
harm to health; and
(f) initiate proceedings of civil or criminal nature against any
person, company, agency, department or institution
that fails or refuses to comply with any directive issued
by any of such Committees.
PART IV
ENvlR.ONMENTAL. PLANNING
42.-( 1) Each local $Overnment authority shall, with respect to its
geographical area of junsdiction prepare the Environmental Action Plan
below the National Environmental Action Plan.
(2) Each Environmental Action Plan made by local authorities
shall-
(a) be in conformity with the National Environmental Action
Plan;
(b) identify environmental problems prevalent in the area
and recommend measures to mitigate the problem;
( c) be prepared in accordance with the provisions of Part
XIV of this Act; and
(d) contain such matters as may be prescribed for under this
Act. 
No. 20 Environmental Management 2004 37
43.-(1) The Minister shall make rules prescribing for the
preparation of periodic environmental plans at sector level.
(2) For the purposes of this section, "sector Ministry" shall be conmued
to mean a Government Ministry or Department or Agency for the time
being responsible for a given segment of the environment or any body
whose activity may have impact on the environment.
(3) At an interval of every five years, each sector Ministry shall
prepare and submit to the Minister, a Sector Environmental Action
Plan.
(4) Each Sector Environmental Action Plan shall-
(a) be in confonnity with the National Environmental Action
Plan;
(b) identify environmental problems prevalent in the area
and recommend measures to mitigate the problem;
(c) be prepared in accordance with provisions of Part XIV of
this Act; and
(d) contain such matters as may be prescribed for under this
Act.
44.-( 1) The Director of Environment shall, in consultation with the
Council, appropriate sector Ministry or Department, or Agency of the
Government responsible for a segment of the environment and whose
nature of activity may have impact on environment, at interval of
every five years, prepare and submit to the Minister a National
Environmental Action Plan.
(2) National Environmental Action Plan shall-
(a) be tbs, basis for integrating environmental concerns
into formulation and implementation of plans and
programmes;
(b) provide general guidance for the management and
protection of the environment and natural resources;.
( c) identify key environmental problems facing each sector of
the environment;
(d) recommend methods for building national awareness on
the importance of sustainable use of the environment and
natural resources for national development;
( e) take into account Action Plans prepared under the
auspices of the local government authorities, Sector
Ministries and any such other levels designated by the
Minister;
Environmental
plans at
sector
level
Environmental
Planning
at
national level 
38 No. 20 Environmental Management 2004
Regulations on
preparation,
adoption
and
implementation of
action
plans
Public
Participation in
preparation of
National
Environ
mental
Action
Plan
Declaration of
Environmental
Protected
Areas
(f) contain an analytical profile of the various uses and values
of the natural resources incorporating considerations of
intergenerational equity; (g) recommend appropriate legal and fiscal incentives that
may be used to encourage the business community to
incorporate environmental requirements into their
planning and operational processes; (h) identify and appraise trends in the development of urban
and rural settlement, their impacts on the environment, and
strategies for the amelioration of their negative impacts; (i) propose guidelines for the integration of standards
of environmental protection· into development planning
and management;
(j) prioritize areas of environmental research and outline
methods of using such research findings;
(k) identify and recommend policy and legislative approaches for
preventing, controlling or mitigating specific as
well as general adverse impacts on the environment; and
(1) provide for any other matter which the Minister may direct.
45. The Minister may make regulations prescribing for the
procedure and the manner in which Environment Action Plan may be
prepared, adopted and implemented.
46. The Minister shall in accordance with Part XIV, facilitate
participation of the general public in the preparation and dissemination
to the public the National Environmental Action Plan.
PARTV
ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT
(a) Environmental Protected Areas
47.-(1) The Minister may, on recommendation of the National
Environmental Advisory Committee, declare any area of land which is
ecologically fragile or sensitive · to be an Environmental Protected
Area. 
No. 20 Environmental Management 2004 39 . . .
(2) The powers conferred on the Minister under this section shall
· not extend to cover areas already declared or which may be declared
as protected area under any other written law.
(3) In determining whether or not ·to declare any area as an
Environmental Protected Area, the Minister shall have regard to-
(a) representations made by any person or non-governmental
organizations with sufficient public or private interest in
the area;
(b) the natural features and beauty of the area;
( c) flora and fauna of the area;
( d) the unique or special geographical, physiographical,
ecological or historic and cultural features of the area;
( e) any special scientific feature, cultural feature or biological
diversity of or existing in the area;
(f) the interests of the local communities in or around the area;
and
(g) the need fur 1he Govennnent t.o comply with any international
obligation under any agreement t.o which Tanzania is a
member.
( 4) The Management of the Environmental Protected Area shall
vest in the Council.
(5) The Minister shall cause to be gazetted and declare
Environmental Protected Areas to be managed by the Council.
48.-( 1) Where an area has been declared to be an Environmental
Protected Area, the Council shall, in consultation with relevant sector
prepare an environmental protection plan for that area.
(2) The environmental protection plan shall-
(a) set out the objectives of protecting and managing the area;
(b) set out policies for the protection and management of the
area;
( c) formulate strategies for protection and management of the
area;
(d) provide for the development of social amenities and
recreational facilities where necessary;
( e) facilitate the carrying out of scientific research; and
(f) incorporate all necessary requirements for environment
management plans.
Environmental
protection plan
and
ecosystem
management
plan for
Environmental
Protected
Areas 
. 40 No. 20 Environmental Management 2004
Environmental
Management
Plans for
national
Protected
Areas
(3) Notwithstanding provisions of the subsections (1) and (2), the
Council may prepare an ecosystem management plan for an
Environmental Protected Area.
(b) Environmental Management Plans for National
· Protected Areas
49.-(1) Each national protected area shall be governed and managed in
accordance with the respective written law under which it is protected.
(2) Notwithstanding the provisions of sub-section (1), each managing
authority of a national protected area shall prepare and implement an
environmental management plan which-
(a) identifies areas of biological diversity;
(b) identifies associated communities, other users and
institutions to be involved;
(c) describes extension and education work with communities
and other users on the establishment of the protected areas;
(d) indicates costs and benefits of the area's protection in a
manner considered equitable by the person's identified under
subsection (1) (b );
(e) describes the boundaries of the national protected area;
(f) defines the management measures to be taken within the
national protected area;
(g) outlines the regulations applicable to the national protected
area;
(h) prescribes means to monitor the implementation of the
plan;
(i) describes any other matter relevant to environmentally
sound management of the national protected area;
(j) is approved by the relevant authority having mandate and
is under the jurisdiction of that protected area; and
(k) is published, where appropriate, in the Gazette by the
Minister responsible for the national protected areas systems.
(3) Management measure that may be taken pursuant to subsection
(1) (f) may include-
(a) zoning;
(b) access restrictions;
(c) use restrictions; 
No. 20 Environmental Management 2004 41
( e) benefit sharing;
(t) entrance fees and permits; and .
(g) any other measure deemed appropriate for proper and
sound use of the area.
(c) Conservation and Protection
SO. The Management and utilisation of land shall be in accordance
with the prevailing land laws provided that where there is any conflict
on environmental aspect of land management, the provisions of this
Act shall prevail.
51.-(1) Where the Minister considers it necessary, he may by order
published in the Gazette, declare any area to be environmentally
sensitive under this Act.
(2) Management of environmental sensitive area under this section
shall · be done in accordance with· procedures prescribed by the
Minister.
(3) Any person who fails, neglects or refuses to comply with
procedures prescribed to regula~ en:vironmentally sensiti_ve . areas
commits an offence.
52. Without prejudice to section 51, the following land shall
constitute environmentally sensitive areas for the pwposes of this Act-
(a) swamps; (b) any area declared as environmentally sensitive by any
local government authority;
( c) area designated by the Council as prone to soil erosion;
( d) land designated by the Council as lands where landslides
have occurred or are likely to occur;
( e) all areas that have been closed by the Minister to livestock
keeping, occupation, cultivation and other specified activities;
(t) area on slopes with a gradient exceeding any angle which
the Minister shall, after taking account of proper scientific
advice, specify;
(g) arid and semi-arid lands;
(h) land specified by the Council as land which should not be
developed on account of its fragile nature or of its
environmental significance; and
Land utilization
management
Environmentally
sensitive
areas
Identification of
environmentally
sensitive
areas 
42 No. 20 Environmental Management 2004
Environmental
conditions to
village
lands Act
No. S of
1999 ..
Declaration of
protected
river;
riverbank,
lake or
lakeshore
and
shorelines
Protection and
Manage
mentof
rivers,
river
bank,
lake or
lakeshore
and
shorelines
(i) land declared under any other written law to be
environmentally sensitive area or hazardous land.
53. Apart from the terms and conditions prescribed by section 29
of the Village Land Act, 1999 regarding village lands or on land
sharing arrangement between pastoralists and .agriculturalists in tenns
of section 58 of the Village Land Act, 1999, the Minister may prescribe
any other additional environmental protection conditions to be
complied with by the grantees of customary rights of occupancy.
54.-(1) Notwithstanding any other written law for the time being
regulating rivers, riverbanks, lakes or lakeshores and shoreline, the
Minister may, in consultation with other relevant Ministries, by notice
published·in the Gazette-
(a) declare a river, riverbank, lake, or lakeshore and shoreline
a protected area for the purposes of this Act; and
(b) impose any restrictions as he considers necessary for the
protection of the. river, riverbank, lake' or lakesliore and
shorelines from environmental degradation.
. (2) While exercising powers under sub~ction (1), the Minisr,er shall
· have regard to: ·· · ·
(a) the geographical size of the river, riverbank, lake or
lakeshore and shoreline;
(b) the interests of the communities resident around the river,
riverbank, lake or lakeshore and shoreline concerned; and
any advise that may be given by sector ministries.
55.-(1) Without prejudice to the provisions of any other relevant
written law, the Council and local government authorities responsible
for environme_ntal matters, shall issue guidelines and prescribe
measures for the protection of riverbanks, rivers, lakes or lakeshores
and shorelines.
(2) Where guidelines and measures have been prescribed pursuant
to subsection (1), it shall be an offence to carry out any of the following
activity without prior authorization or pennit issued by the Minister-
(a) use, erect, construct, place, alter, extend, remove 01
demolish a structure in or under the ocean or natural lake
shorelines, riverbank or water reservoir; 
No. 20 · Environmental Management 2004 43
(b) excavate, drill, tunnel or disturb the shoreline of ocean or
natural lake, river bank or water reservoir;
( c) introduce or plant any part of a plant, plant specimen
whether alien or indigenous, dead or alive in a ocean river,
ocean river bank, lake or lakeshore;
(d) ·deposit a substance in a · river, river- bank, lake or,
lakeshore, shoreline or wetland or in or under its bed,
which is likely to have adverse environmental effects on
river, river bank, lake or lakeshore shoreline or wetland;
( e) direct or block a river, river bank, lake or; lakeshore,
shoreline or wetland from its natural course; or
(f) drain a river or lake.
(3) Any person contravening the provisions of this section
commits an offence.
( 4) The Minister may delegate his powers under this section to the
Director of Environment;. or an officer of the local government
authority or an officer in the sector Ministry.
56.-( 1) The Minister shall, after . consultation with the Minister
responsible for land, declare any area of land to be a protected wetland
. under this Act.
(2) For purposes of management of wetlands declared under
subsection (1), sector Ministries under whose jurisdiction any area of
wetland falls, shall be responsible for the management of wetlands
falling under their respective jurisdiction.
(3) Sector environmental coordinators shall furnish to the Director
of Environment information on the management and status of
wetlands falling under their respective jurisdiction.
(4) The conditions prescribed under section 55(2) shall apply
mutatis mutandis to wetlands.
(5) The Minister in consultation with other sector Ministries may
make regulations and guidelines on the sustainable management . of
wetlands protected under this Act.
Declaration of
protected
wetlands 
44 No. 20 Environmental Management 2004
Prohibit- 57.-(1) Subject to subsection (2), no human activities of a
ion of permanent nature or which may, by their nature, likely to compromise hwnan activities or adversely affect conservation and, or the protection of ocean or
in certain natural lake shorelines, riverbank, water dam or reservoir, shall be
areas conducted within sixty metres.
Protection of
mountains,
hills and
landscapes
Promotion of
coastal
zone
environmental
manage- ment
(2) The Minister may make guidelines for the conduct of human
activities within the areas referred to under subsection (1 ).
58.-( 1) The Council in consultation with local government
authorities shall, within five years of coming into operation of this
Act, identify hilly or mountainous areas, which are at risk from
environmental degradation.
(2) A hilly or mountainous area shall be regarded to be at risk from
environmental degradation if-
(a) it is prone to soil erosion;
(b) landslides have occurred or are likely to occur in that area;
(c) vegetation cover has been removed or is likely to be
removed from _the _are_a at_ a_ rare faster ~an.. it is being
replaced; or
(d) any other land use activity in that area is likely to lead
to environmental degradation.
(3) The Minister shall, by Order in the Gazette, issue a list of
landscapes, mountains and hilly areas regarded to be at risk from
environmental degradation.
(4) A list of all areas referred to under subsection (3) shall be kept
under the custody of Council and be treated as protected area and, in
relation therewith the Council shall prescribe strategies for their
management.
59. The Minister shall, after consultation with the Minister
responsible for local government authorities and any other relevant
institutions make regulations for the promotion of integrated coastal
zone environmental management. 
No. 20 Environmental Management 2004 45
60.-( 1) Every applicant for water use permit issued under the Environrelevant laws governing management of water resources, abstraction mental
and use of water, shall be required to make a statement on the likely ::~:aimpact on the environment due to the use of water requested. under
. (2) For the p_urposes of keeping records of matters· impacting on water laws the environment by reason of abstracifon and use of water, the Basin
Water Boards shall file yearly returns to the Sector Environmental
Coordinator indicating extent of compliance by water use pennit holders
of the following conditio~s-
(a) obligation to return water after its use to the body of water
from which it was taken;
(b) ensuring that water that is returned to any specified source
is not polluted; and
( c) taking of the precautions to the satisfaction of the Water
Officer to prevent accumulations in any river, stream or
water course of silt, sand, gravel, stones, sawdust refuse,
sewerage, sisal waste or any other substances likely to
affect injuriously the use of such water by human and
other components of environment.
(3) Basin Water Boards in prioritising different µses of water shall
ensure that adequate water is· 'made available for environmental
purposes.
61. Without prejudice to the powers of the local government
authorities on matters relating to the discharge of sewerage, the
Minister may advise, and where appropriate, issue any direction to any
person, officer or authority on such discharge.
62. The Minister shall consult and advise the Minister responsible
for water on the making of rules governing issuance of pennits for the
discharge of effluent.
63.-( 1) All forests shall be managed in accordance with the
provisions of the Forests Act, 2002 and matters relating to environment
shall confonn with the provisions of this Act.
(2) Where · any matter concerning management of environment
undertaken according to the provisions of the Forests Act, 2002 is in
conflict with this Act, the provision of this Act shall prevail.
Minister
may
advise
on the
discharge of
sewerage
Consultation on
dis-
:charge
Management of
forest
resources
Act No.
14 of
2002 
46 No. 20 Environmental Management 2004
Promotion of
conservation of
energy
Promotion of
conservation of
· fishe·ncs·
and
wildlife
resources,
etc.
Act Nos.
22of
2003 and
29 of
1994
Conservatiol) of
biological
diversity
(3) The Minister shall, in relation to the making of rules on ·
environmental management of forest resources consult the Minister
responsible for forestry.
64. The Minister shall, in consultation with Minister responsible ·
for forestry ot as the case may be,- energy, promote -the use of
renewable sources of energy by-
(a) promoting research in appropriate renewal sources of
energy;
(b) creating incentives for the promotion of renewable sources '
of energy;
(c) promoting policies and measures for the conservation of '
. non-renewable sources of energy; and . i
(d) taking measures to encourage the planting of trees and
woodlots by individual users, institutions and by community
groups.
65.-( 1) All fisheries resources shall be managed in accordance with
the provisions of the Fisheries Act, 2003 and the Marine Parks and
Reserves Act, 1994.
(2) Wildlife resources shall be managed in accordance with the
provisions of the legislation relating to wildlife matters.
(3) All tourism activities shall be conducted and managed in
accordance with the laws related to tourism.
( 4) Where any matter concerning the management of environment
undertaken in accordance with the provision of the Fisheries Act,
2003, the Marine Parks and Reserves Act, 1994, any law governing
conservation of wildlife · and tourism laws is in conflict with this Act,
this Act shall prevail.
66.-( I) The Minister shall strive to attain the conservation of
biological diversity, the sustainable use of its components and the fair
and equitable sharing of the benefits arising out of the utilization of
genetic resources.
(2) The powers of the Minister under this section shall in general
include regulating appropriate access to genetic resources and by
appropriate transfer of relevant technologies, taking into account all
rights over those resources~ indigenous knowledge, technologies and
appropriate funding. · · 
No. 20 Environmental Management 2004 47
(3) The Minister may, take into accowit of any particular conditions
and capabilities and after consultation with relevant sector Ministry,
make regulation prescribing:-
(a) the development of national strategies, programmes or
plans for the conservation and sustainable use of biological
diversity; . . . . (b) · adaptation of such existing strategies,· plans or programmes
for the purposes of conservation of biological diversity;
(c) integration, as far as possible and as appropriate, of the
conservation and sustainable use of biological diversity
into relevant sectoral or cross.:sectoral plans, programmes
and policies;
(d) identification of the components of biological diversity
important for conservation and sustainable use, having
regard to. any international standards applicable to
Tanzania;
( e) monitoring through sampling and other techniques, the
components of biological diversity, paying particular
attention to those requiring urgent conservation measures
and those which offer the greatest potential for sustainable
~; . (f) identifying the processes and categories of activities
which have or are likely to have significant adverse
impacts on the conservations· equitable sharing and
sustainable use of biological diversity, and monitoring
their effects through sampling and other techniques; and
(g) maintenance and organization:-
(i) by any mechanism; or
(ii) data derived from identification and monitoring
activities pursuant to this section.
67.-(l) The Minister may, in consultation with relevant sector
Ministry, make regulations providing for in-situ conservation of
biological diversity.
(2) Regulations made under this section may prescribe:
(a) procedures for the establishment of a systems of protected
areas or areas where special measures need to be taken to
conserve biological diversity;
(b) guidelines for the selection, establishment and management
of protected areas or areas where special measures need to
be taken to conserve biological diversity;
(c) how to regulate.or manage biological resources important
for the conservation of biological diversity whether within or
outside protected areas, with a view to ensuring their
conservation and sustainable use; (d) the promotion of protection of ecosystems, natural habitats
Conserva1ion of
biological
diversity
in-situ 
48 No. 20 · Environmental Management 2004 ·
and the maintenance of viable populations of species in natural surroundings;
( e) the promotion of environmentally sound and sustainable
development in areas adjacent to protected areas with a
view to furthering protection of these areas;
(f) rehabilitation and restoration of degraded ecosystems and ·
promotion of the recovery . of threatened species, inter
alia, through the development and implementation of
... plans or o~~r management strategies;
(g) establishment or management of the risks associated with
the use and release of living modified organisms resulting
from biotechnology which are genetically modified and
which are likely to have adverse environmental impacts
that could affect the · conservation and sustainable use of
biological diversity, taking also into account the risks to
human health as well as social, economic cultural and
ethical concern;
(h) prevention of the introduction of, control or eradication of
those alien species which threaten ecosystems, habitats or
species;
(i) furnishing conditions that may be needed for compatibility
between present uses and the conservation of biological
diversity and the sustainable use of its components;
(j) guidelines on methods to respect, preserve and maintain
knowledge, innovations and practices of indigenous and
local communities;
(k) adopt economically and socially sound measures that act
as incentives for the conservation and sustainable use of
· components of biological diversity;
(l) promotion and encouragement of the equitable sharing of
· the benefits arising from the utilization of such knowledge,
innovations and practices; and
(m) procedures for the establishment. of a system.or systems of
protected areas or areas where special measures need to be
taken to conserve biological diversity. 
Environmental Management 2004 49
68. The Minister may, in consultation with relevant Ministries,
make rules with respect to ex-situ conservation prescribing the following
measures:
(a) adopt measures for the ex-situ conservation of components of
biological diversity originating in Tanzania;
(b) establish and maintain .facilities for ex-situ conservation
and research on plants, animals and micro-organisms,
preferably in the country of origin of genetic resources;
( c) adopt measures for the recovery and rehabilitation of
threatened species and for their reintroduction into their
natural habitats under appropriate conditions;
(d) regulate and manage collection of biological resources
from natural·habitats for ex-situ conservation purposes so
as not to threaten ecosystems and in-situ populations of
species;
(e) adopt economically and socially sound measures that act
as incentives for the conservation and sustainable use of
components of biological diversity; ·and ·
(f) cooperate in providing financial and other support for ex-situ
conservation.
69.-(l) Without prejudice to any law · governing biosafety and
biotechnology, any person who develops, handles, uses, import or
export genetically modified organisms (GMO) and, or their product
shall be under general obligation to ensure that such organisms do not
hann, cause injury or loss to the environment and human health
including socio-economic, cultural and ethical concerns. .
(2) The hann, injury or loss include _personal injury, damage to
property, financial loss, and damage to environment or to biological
diversity.
(3) In this section "organisms" means any active, ineffective or
· donnant stage of life fonn of an entity characterized as living, including
plants, bacteria, fungi, mycoplasmas like entities, vertebrate and
invertebrate animals, as wells as entities such as various, viruses or
any living entity related to it.
70.-(1) The Minister may in consultation with relevant sector
Ministers issue guidelines and prescribe measures for the sustainable
management and utilisation of rangelands.
Conserva
-tion of
biological
diversity
ex-situ
Regulation for
the
development,
handling,
and use
of
Genetically
Modified
Organisms lll'ld
their
: products
Management of
rangelands 
50 No. 20 Environmental-Management 2004
Environmental
land use
planning
directives
Obligation to
use land
sustainably
Protection of
natural
and cultural '
heritage
(2) In issuing the guidelines and prescribing measures referred to
in subsection (l)·, the Minister shall be guided by-
(a) the carrying capacity of the land;
(b) the conservation of the soil;
( c) the · risk to desertification faced by rangeland; and
(d) any Other factor, which the Minister may in· consultation
with relevant sector Ministers, consider appropriate.
71. The Minister may, in consultation with the Minister responsible
for land, give ·general and specific environmental and land use
planning directives which shall be incorporated or taken into account
by-
(a) the National Land Use Planning Commission;
(b) the Area Planning Committees established under any law
regulating urban planning;
( c) sewerage authorities;
(d) loc~ government authorities responsible for any rural or
urban planning functions; ' '
( e) relevant local government authorities when preparing any
land use regulations designating areas set aside for residential,
commercial, industrial, pastoral and agricultural purposes; and
(f) any other institution carrying on responsibility touching on
land use.
72. Land users and occupiers shall be responsible for the protection,
improvement and nourishment of the land, and for using it in an
environmentally sustainable manner as may be prescribed by the
Minister.
73.-( 1) Any matter or activity relating to protection and conservation of
natural and cultural heritage shall take into account necessary
requirements for the protection of environment as provided for under
. thisAct. .
(2). Where any matter concerning management of the environment
undertaken according to any written law is in conflict with this Act,
this Act shall prevail.
Protec- 74.-(1) The Minister shall, in consultation with the relevant sector
tion of Ministry- the
atmosphere 
No. 20 Environmental Management 2004 51
(a) undertake or commission other persons to undertake
national studies and give due recognition to development
in scientific knowledge relating to substances, activities
and practices that deplete the stratospheric ozone layer
and other components of the stratosphere to the detriment
· of public health and the environment;
(b) issue guidelines, and institute programmes relating to-
(i) the elimination of substances that deplete the ozone
lay~r;.or . . .
(ii) management practices and activities iikely to lead to
the degradation of the ozone layer and the stratosphere;
or
(iii) the reduction and minimization of risks to human
health created by the degradation of the ozone layer
and the stratosphere.
(2) The Minister shall make regulations for control of importation,
exportation· aild·consiifuption of ozone depleting substances or related
equipment.
75. The Minister shall, in consultations with relevant sector
Ministries:
( a) take measures to address climate change, particularly the
impacts of climate change and adaptation measures;
(b) issue guidelines periodically to Ministries and any other
institutions in order to address climate change and its
impacts as a result of global wanning;
(c) require Ministries and independent Government departments
to put in place strategies and action plans to deal with
climate change and to · advise schot>ls and higher learning
institutions to include matters relating to climate change in
their curriculum;
(d) review and approve any measures undertaken to address
climate change by any institution, finn, sector or individuals
be it foreign or local, including those related to the use of
land, water, forests or any other ecosystems within the
United Republic to sequester greenhouse gases; and
(e) project national positions at global level on how to deal
with the problem of climate change in the context of the
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change, and its related Protocol(s).
Measures
on
climate
change 
52 No. 20 Environmental Management 2004
Management of
working
environment and
danger-
·ous
materials
and
processes
Powers
of the
Minister
to make
regulation on
persistent
organic
. pollutants
76,-(1) The Minister may, in consultation with relevant Ministries,
prescribe measures for the improvement of the working environment.
(2) The Minister may, by regulations prescribe any description of
process of substance to be dangerous process the carrying on of which
or the release from it of dangerous materials into the environment, is
subject to control under this Act.
(3) Regulations made by the Minister pursu_ant to subsection (2)
may-
(a) prescribe separately for each environmental medium, the
substances the release of which into that medium shall be
subject to control;
(b) provide that a description of substance is only prescribed
for any environmental medium so far as it is released into
that medium in such amounts ov.er such periods in such
concentrations or iii such other circwristances as may be
specified in the regulations; and
( c) prescribe conditions of authoriz.ation and matters implied
in the authoriz.ation of application of the process and
release of substances into the environment. . . .
77.-(1) For the purpose of eliminating releases of persistent organic
pollutant:
(a) each sector Ministry shall take the legal and administrative
measures necessary to reduce or eliminate releases of
intentionally produced persistent organic pollutants in its
production, use, import and export in accordance with the
provisions of the Stockholm Convention;
(b) the Director of F.nvironment in consultation with respective
sector Ministries may establish a list of chemicals for
which the Government shall request specific· exemption
under the Convention; and
( c) each sector Ministry shall take measures to reduce the total
releases derived from anthropogenic sources of
unintentionally produced persistent organic pollutants.
(2) The Minister shall by regulation in the Gazette, prescribe
persistent organic pollutants which shall not be used. 
No. 20 . Environmental Management 2004 53
(3) The Director of Environment shall prepare and oversee a
national implementation plan for the Stockholm Convention as provided in
the Convention. ·
( 4) All relevant sector Ministries and local government authorities
shall mainstream respective parts of the National Implementation Plan
and into their policies, legislation, plans and programmes and submit
annual reports to the Minister on progress made in implementation of
the National Implementation Plan.
(5) Without prejudice to-any applicable written Jaw, the Minister
shall have the power to make regulations prescribing the following
matters pertaining to persistent organic pollutants-
(a) compliance with international obligations on persistent
organic pollutants and pesticides issues;
(b) compliance with the Stockholni Convention on Persistent
Organic Pollutants of 2001;
( c) raising of awareness of sustainable alternative approaches
in the replacement·of persistent organic poUutants;
(d) carrying out of inventory of stocks of persistent 01ganic
pollutants;
( e) disposal of existing stocks of persistent organic pollutants;
(t) involvement of industry particularly · with reference to
sharing the costs for disposal and taking responsibility of
disposal of persistent organic pollutants;
(g) promotion of appropriate pesticide and chemicals
management .Practices;
(h) preparation of appropriate data-base system for better
knowledge of problems of stocks;
(i) regulate imports and exports of persistent organic pollutants;
(j) proper packages as basic requirements to avoid leakage
and contamination of the environment both during
transportation and storage;
(k) safe transportation of toxic waste or dangerous chemicals,
obsolete stocks or related chemicals as a way of protecting
the environment and human health;
(1) compliance with international agreements on movement
and hannonisation of transportation ofhazardous materials;
(m) designing the best way to strengthen national capabilities
and capacities for the management of chemicals, including
transfer of technology, providing financial and technical
assistance and promoting cooperation with other states; 
54 No. 20 Environmental Management 2004
Prior
informed
consent
procedures for
certain
hazardous
chemicals and
pesticides
(n) regulating the import and . use · of chemicals the use of
which has been prohibited, or refused approval· or has
been withdrawn under any written law in order to protect
human health or the environment;
( o) designation of severely hazardous pesticide fonnulations,
severely restricted chemicals iri Tanzania;
(p) environmental safety aspects of liquid gas pipelines,
natural gas pipelines, and the transportation of designated
dangerous materials;
(q) compensations, clean-ups and emergency response to
hazardous substances released into the environment and
clean-up of inactive hazardous waste disposal sites;
(r) national, city, municipal, town and village contingency
plans in case of release of hazardous substances into the
environment;
(s) emergency planning, notification, reporting and training
requirements; and
(t) contingency plans in case of major incfostrial accidents,
control of hazardous fires, explosives and hazardous toxic
emissions.
· 78~-( l )- The Minister may, in relation to management of Prior
Infonned Consent (PIC) chemicals, designate an institution which
shall have the duty to:
(a) recommend new entries of PIC chemicals of interest to
Tanzania;
(b) take adequate legal and administrative measures to
prevent or minimize adverse effects of PIC chemicals to
human health,· life and the environment;
(c) conduct research on alternatives of PIC chemicals;
(d) internalize procedures in import and export of PIC
chemicals;
(e) promote awareness on PIC chemicals and their effects to
human health, life and the environment;
(f) undertake risk assessment of PIC chemicals and build
capacity in risk management;
(g) carry on any other acqvities in accordance with obligations of
the Rotterdam Convention in their geographical areas of
jurisdiction; and
(h) submit an annual implementation report of the Rotterdam
. Convention of 1998 in.their geographical areas of jurisdiction. 
No. 20 Environmenta/Management 2004 55
(2) The Minister shall, in consultation with the Minis.tries
responsible for agriculture and for health, make regulations and
guidelines on import, export, transportation and disposal of stocks of
PIC chemicals and their wastes.
· 79.-(1) The Minister shall, in· collaboration with other agencies,
promote cleaner production technologies and techniques and foster
sustainable consumption of goods and services.
(2) The Minister may prescribe guidelines relating to:
(a) handbook on cleaner production technologies and
techniques and on sustainable consumption to guide
industrial, tourism, trade, mining, agriculture and service
oriented activities;
(b) monitoring of the impact of cleaner production;
(c) mainstreaming of cleaner production in financing
procedures of the financial institutions in order to achieve
stistmnable financing mechanism of cleaner production
initiatives; and
( d) mainstreaming of cleaner production and sustainable
coµ.sumption approaches in relevant policies at Government . and company level. . . .
(d) Economic Instruments
80.-(1) For purposes of minimising environmental damage, the
Director of Environment shall periodically prepare proposals on packages
of economic instruments and financial incentives and forward the
same to the Minister.
(2) The Minister may, in consultation with the Minister responsible for
finance, make regulations and rules on economic instruments thereby
prescribing-
(a) how best to oblige individuals or firms when making
decisions about production, consumption and investment,
to consider the environmental consequences;
(b) measures to be adopted to internalise environmental costs
without relying on the pricing mechanism;
( c) price-based measures, user charges and subsidies to
internalize environmental costs and benefits;
(d) subsidies, tax deductions and rebates to be paid to advance
environmental protection;
Promotion of
cleaner
production and
sustainable consumption of
goods
and services
·Economic
incentives and
instruments
for the
protection of
the environment 
56 No. 20 Environmental Management 2004
Obligation to
undertake
Environ
mental
Impact
Assessm
ent
(e) special grants for particular programmes and projects,
· including environmental projects;
(t) encourage return of bottles, plastics and metals for recycling
and proper disposal; and
(g) any other measure the Minister may impose on an economic
instrument. .
(3) The Minister may, on approval of the Minister responsible for
finance, further prescribe the following incentives and financial
measures for the protection ofthe environment- <
(a) effluent charges, based on the content and quantity of
discharges into the air, water, or sewerage system;
.(b) user chaige fee for using such natural resource and for others
being provided with a· service such as garbage collection;
( c) product charges, such as charges on plastic or bottle
packaging that are used to discourage disposal of or
. encourage ~cycling; and . .
(d) sales and excise taxes that give environmentally friendly
products a price advantage over polluting products.
( 4) "Economic Instrument" as used in this Act means an instrument for
. environmental and natural· resources management designed to
influence behaviour of economic agents in order to ensure sustainable
use and protection of biophysical resources, and includes fiscal
instruments, charge systems, property rights, nuuket creation, perfonnance
bonds and deposit refund systems, liability systems, provision
of information and financial instruments.
PART VI
. ENvlRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT AND
OTHER ASSESSMENTS
81.-(1) Any person, being a proponent or a developer of a project
or undertaking of a type specified in the Third Schedule to this Act, to
which Environmental Impact Assessment is required to be made by
the law governing such project or undertaking or in the absence of
such law, by regulations made by the Minister, shall undertake or
cause to be undertaken, at his own cost, an environmental impact
assessment study. 
No. 20 Environmental Management 2004 57
(2) An Environmental Impact Assessment study shall be carried
out prior to the commencement or financing of a project or undertaking.
(3) A permit or licence for the carrying out of any project or
undertaking in accordance with any written law shall not entitle the
proponent or developer to undertake or to cause to be undertaken a
project or activity without an environmental impact assessment
certificate issued under this Act.
(4) Any person who contravenes subsection (3), commits an
offence.
82.-(1) Subject to the provisions of subsection (2), the Minister
shal1··make regulations and guidelines on how environmental impact
assessment shall be conducted under this Act and under any other written
law.
(2) Where the law requires Enviroruriental Impact Assessment to
be done in respect of any project or undertaking and the manner in
which such Environmental Impact Assessment is to be done, then it
shall not be necessary to apply standards stipulated in the regulations
made under this Act unless the standard prescribed under such law
does not meet minimum standards necessary for the conduct of such
Environmental Impact Assessment.
83.-( 1) Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (2) of section
82, Environmental Impact Assessments shall be conducted by experts
or firms of experts whose names and qualifications are registered as
such by the Council. _
(2) The Minister shall prescribe in the regulations qualifications of
a person who may conduct Environmental Impact Assessment.
(3) The Council shall maintain a register of experts and firms of
experts authorized to conduct Environmental Impact Assessment.
( 4) The register of experts and finns of experts shall be maintained
in a public registry and its entries may be searched by the public upon
payment of a prescribed fee.
Environmental
Impact
Assessm
ent regu- ·
lations and
guidelines
Environmental
Impact
Assess-
·ment to
be conducted
by
experts 
58 No. 20 Environmenta/Management 2004
Issuance
of certificate
not a
· defence
in legal
proceedings
Detennination of
the scope
of
Environmental
Impact
Statement
Environmental
Impact
Statement
(5) A proponent of a project shall select experts amongst the
persons possessing qualifications prescribed pursuant to the provisions of
subsection (2), to conduct the Environmental Impact Assessment.
84.-(l) The issuance of an Environmental Impact Assessment
certificate in respect of any project shall not be a defence in any legal
proceedings brought against a proponent of a project or undertaking in
respect of the manner in which the project or undertaking is being
_ executed, m~ed or __ operated.
(2) The Environmental Impact Assessment certificate may be
transferred from one holder to another in the event the project changes
ownership and not otherwise and only so upon notifi~on in writing ·
to the Minister within thirty days of the transfer.
85.-( 1) Upon requiring an Environmental Impact Statement, the
Council shall detennine the scope of the Environmental Impact !
· Statement by agreeing with the ·proponent on:- ·
(a) the prescribed issues that must be addressed by the
Environmental· Impact Statement;
(b) persons an<I institutions that must be. consu~t.ed during the I
preparation of the Environmental Impact Statement; i
(c) methodologies and approaches in the collecting, collating
and analyzing the required data; and
(d) any ·· other matter detennining the scope of the
Environmental Impact Statement.
(2) The Environmental Impact Statements shall be kept and
maintained·by the Council·in a public registry and their contents, may
be searched upon payment of a prescribed fee.
86.-( l) The Council shall, upon examination of a project brief,
· require the proponent of a project or undertaking to carry out an
Environmental Impact Assessment study and prepare an
Environmental Impact Statement.
(2) The Environmental Impact Statement prepared under subsection
( l) shall be submitted to the Council for review.
(3) The Environmental Impact Statement shall be prepared in
accordance with regulations made by the Minister. 
No. 20 Environmental Management 2004 59
87.-(1) The Council shall, within sixty days following submission Review
of Environmental Impact Statement carry out its review. of
Environ-
(2) The Council may, for purposes of carrying out reviews under
subsection (1), set,up a cross-sectoral technical advisory committee to
advise it on reviews of Environmental Impact Statement.
(3) The proponent shall comply with requests for additional
information necessary to enable the Council to complete the review
and shall do so within the time specified in tiie request.
( 4) . The infonnation requested by the Council for purposes of the
Environmental Impact Statement review may include but not limited
to site and· design maps, project documents, reports or materials,
technical details, sectoral advice and any other matters it may deem
necessary.
mental
Impact
Statement
88.-(1) The Council may, during the review process, visit for purposes '·lfflpection
of inspection or verification any site or place associated with the visit for
proposed project or undertaking at the proponent's cost. ~f pose
(2) The Environmental -Impact Statement review process shall be
based on the following criteria:
(a) the balance between short and long term socio-economic
benefits of the project and the detriment to the human and
physical environment;
(b) the nature of the project or undertaking and how it is likely to
meet environmental standards;
(c) the possible mitigation alternatives or other remedial
measures;
(d) comments received during public hearings and other
consultative processes under this Part; and
· (e) any other review criteria as prescribed ~n the regulations.
89.-(l) Without prejudice to Part XIV, the Council shall adopt
guidelines on public participation, especially those likely to be affected by
the project being the subject of an Environmental Impact Assessment
study or review.
(2) Without prejudice to subsection (1), upon receipt of the
Environmental Impact Statement, the . Council shallEnvironmental
Impact
Statement
review
Public
participation in
Environmental
Impact
Assess-
. ment 
60 No. 20 Environmental Management 2004
Public ·
hearing
and
information disclosure
Recommendationson
Environmental
Impact
Statement
by the
Council
Approval
or disapproval of
Environmental
Impact
Statement
by the
Minister
(a) circulate it for written comments from various institutions
and government agencies;
(b) notify the public by any appropriate means of the place
and time for reviewing the Environmental Impact
Statement and submitting written comments in a prescribed
manner; and ;
( c) solicit oral or written comments by any appropriate means,
of the people who will be affected.
90.-(1) Notwithstanding the provisions of section 87 of this Act and
other provisions of this Act, the review of the Environmental Impact
Statement shall be conducted, Inter a/ta, through public hearings.
(2) The Council shall within thirty days of receipt of an
Environmental Impact Statement decide whether or not to convene a
public hearing for purposes of collecting submissions or comments on
the proposed project or undertaking.
(3) Where the Council decides or is requested to convene a public
hearing, it shall display and make available for inspection and copying
all re_levant reports, 4~ume~t:s and written submissions mad~ during
and after the period of review until the public hearing is finalized.
91. Upon completion of the review of the Environmental Impact
Statement, the Council shall submit recommendations to the Minister.
92.-( 1) The Minister may, within thirty days, upon receipt of
recommendations of the Council-
(a) approve the Environmental Impact Statement and issue an
Environmental Impact Assessment Certificate; or
(b) disapprove the Environmental Impact Statement; or
( c) approve an Environmental Impact Statement subject to
such conditions as he may determine and issue an
Environmental Impact Assessment Certificate. 
No. 20 Environmental Management . 2004 61
(2) Where the Minister disapproves an Environmental Impact
Statement, he shall-
(a) notify the proponent in writing stating reasons fur disapproval;
or
(b) recommend to the licencing authority that the activity
should not be licenced.
93. The Minister shall disapprove and recommend to the licensing
authority that the project should not be licenced or, where the licence
has been issued, be cancelled if-
(a) the project or undertaking is likely to cause significant adverse
impact on the environment;
(b) there are no alternatives which can mitigate or remedy
the significant likely hann to the environment;
( c) the proponent has failed to abide to the mitigation measures
stated in the Environmental Impact Statement or conditions
issued by the Minister; or
(d) there are compelling Social, economic,' health, cultural, or
religious reasons which may or are likely to lead
to irreversible impact on the society.
94. The Minister may, by an instrument published in the Gazette,
delegate power of approval of Environmental Impact Statement to the
Director of Environment, local government authorities or sector
Ministries.
95. Any person who is aggrieved by the decision of the Minister to
approve or disapprove an Environmental Impact Statement may
appeal to the Environmental Appeals Tribunal.
96.-( 1) The Director-General shall maintain records of decisions on
approvals or disapprovals of Environmental Impact Statement.
(2) The record referred under subsection (1) shall be kept
in a public registry and be accessible to the public upon payment of a
prescribed fee.
Cancellation of
licence
upon disapproval of
Environmental
Impact
Assessment
Delegation of
powers
to
approve
Environmental
Impact
Assessment
Appeal
against
decision
of the
Minister
onEIA
Maintenance of
records
of decisions on
Environmental
Impact
Assessment 
62 No. 20 . Environmental Management 2004
Require- 97. The Council may, at any time after the issuance of an
ment of Environmental Impact Assessment Certificate, require the holder of fresh
Environ- such certificate to conduct a fresh Environmental Impact Assessment
mental study at his own cost and submit an Environmental Impact Statement
_ _ Impact
··· Assessment
study
wi~in such time as the Council may prescribe if- _
. . (a) there' is substantial. change or modification in the project or
undertaking or in the manner in which the project is being
operated;
(b) the project or undertaking poses environmental_ threat$ which
could not be reasonably foreseen at the time of the study or
review; or
( c) in due course it is established that the information or data
given by the proponent or undertaking in previous
Environmental Impact Assessment process was inaccurate,
false or intended to mislead the Council.
Offence ~8. Any person who fails or neglects to comply with the di,rections
for con- of the Council issued under section 97 commits an offence. traventing EIA
Environmental
monitoring
99.-( 1) . The_ Council shall, in consultation with the relevant secto.r
Ministry or government agency, monitor-
. (a) all environmental criteria and phenomena with .a view
to making an assessment of any possible changes in the
environment and their possible impacts; and
(b) the operation of any project or undertaking with a view to
dete-rmining its immediate and long term effects on the
environmefit.
(2) An environmental inspector or any other authorized officer
may, upon giving due notice, enter upon any land or premises for the
purposes of monitoring the effects upon the environment of
any activities carried out on that land or premises. 
No. 20 Environmental Management 2004 63
100.-(1) Where the results of monitoring indicate non-compliance
with the Environmental Impact Assessment, the holder of the
Environmental Impact Assessment Certificate may be required-
(a) to take all reasonable measures to mitigate the impact of
such. non compliance and report such measures to the
Council; or
(b) to pay a fine imposed by way of administrative measure
by the Council for such non compliance.
(2) The Council may recommend to the Minister for revocatioh of
an Environmental Impact Assessment Certificate if the results of an
additional monitoring indicate persistent non-compliance with the
· conditions stipulated in the Environmental Impact Assessment
Certificate and the Council may institute proceedings in a court of law
for damages for any injury that may have occurred as a result of such
non-compliance.
101.-(1) The Council shall be responsible for carrying out
an environmental audit in respect of any project or undertaking that is
likely to have significant impact on the environment.
(2) An environmental inspector or any other authorized officer
may; upon giving due notice, enter into any land or premises
for purposes of detennining how far the activities carried out on that
land or premises confonn with the Environmental Impact Statement.
(3) Notwithstanding the provisions of subsections (1) and (2) the
proponent or operator of a project. or. undertaking for which an
Environmental Impact Statement has been made shall keep accurate
records and make annual reports to the Council describing how far the
project confonns in operation with the statements made in the
Environmental Impact Statement.
( 4) The proponent or the operator of a project or undertaking shall
take all reasonable measures to mitigate any undesirable effects not
previously anticipated in the Environmental Impact Statement and .
shall prepare, for submission to the Council, a comprehensive report
of those measures, on an annual basis or as the Council may, in writing,
direct.
Monitoring compliance
with
Environmental
Impact ·
Statement
Environmental
audit 
64 No. 20 Environmental Management 2004
Undertaking of
safe
decommissioning
and site
rehabilitation
Other
assessments
Strategic
environmental
assessment of
Bills,
regulations,
policies,
strategies,
programmes and
plans
102.-(1) Upon expiry of a project or undertaking stipulated under
the Second Schedule to this Act, the proponent or operator shall, at his
own cost. undertake safe decommissioning, site rehabilitation and
ecosystem restoration before the closure of the project or undertaking.
(2) The Director of Environment shall not discharge an
environmental performance bond deposited under section 227 of this
Act until the holder :fulfils the conditions stipulated under subsection
(1).
103. Notwithstanding the preceding provisions of this Part, the
Minister may require any person whose. activities are likely to have an
impact on the environment to make a statement on the social, health,
biotechnological or any other risk impact assessment he may detennine.
PARTVII
STRATEGIC ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT
104.-(1) It shall be a requirement when preparing a Bill for
enactment of any law that is likely to have effect on-
( a) the management, conservation and enhancement of
the environment; or
(b) sustainable management of natural resources,
to conduct and submit to the Minister a detailed statement regarding
Strategic Enviropmental Assessment of the effect likely to be caused
on the environment in the implementation of the provisions of that law.
(2) Without pr~judice to subsection (1), when promulgating
regulations, public policies, programmes and development plans shall
include a Strategic Environmental Assessment Statement on the likely
effects of such regulations, public policies, programmes or
development plans may have on the environment.
(3) Every. Strategic Environmental Assessment Statement made
under this section shall include-
(a) · a full description of a policy, Bill, legislation, strategy, programme,
plan and the objectives it intends to achieve; 
No. 20 Environmental Management 2004 65
(b) an identification, description and assessment of the positive
and adverse effects that implementation of the proposed
policy Bills, strategy, programme, plan or legislation is
likely to have on the environment and to the sustainable
management of natural resources;
( c) an identification, description and assessment of likely
effects of alternative means to achieve the objectives of the
policy, Bill, legislation, strategy, programme and plan;
( d) an identification, description and assessment of a range of
practicable measures that could be taken to avoid, mitigate
or remedy any adverse effect that may occur as a result of
the implementation of the policy, Bill, legislation, strategy,
programme, or plan; and
( e) any other infonnation that the Minister may by regulations
prescribe.
(4) Where a person responsible for the Bill, regulation, public policy,
strategy, programme, or plan, does not require a . Strategic
Environmental Assessment under this section, he shall submit a draft of the relevant document to the Minister who shall, as soon as practicable,
detennine whether or not an assessment is required and shall furnish
his decision and the reasons for it.
(5) Upon receipt of the strategic environmental assessment report,
the Minister shall direct the Director of Environment to review the policy,
Bill, legislation, strategy, programme or plan and furnish his opinion
to the Minister who shall thereafter give his opinion to the person
concerned.
(6) A person to whom the Minister has given opinion shall be
required to comply with recommendations made and shall be required
to submit a fresh report to him indicating:
(a) the revisions that have been made to the original document
in order to promote environmental management and the
sustainable manage111ent of natural resources or to avoid,
mitigate or remedy any adverse effects which implementation -
of the original legislation, policy, programme or plan, may
have had;
(b) any other measures that have tQ . be taken to avoid, mitigate
or remedy any adverse effects on the enviromn.ent and
when these were or will be taken, and if any measures
recommended by the assessment report have or will not be
. taken, the reasons for.not doing so; and . 
66 No. 20 Environmental Management 2004
Strategic
environmental
assessment for
mineral,
petroleum,
hydroelectric
power
and
major
water
project
plans
(c) a revised version of the policy, Bill, legislation, strategy,
programme or plan.
(7) Where the Minister is of the opinion that the environmental
concerns raised during the strategic environmental assessment process
are not adequately addressed by the revised. Qill, regulatio.n, policy,
strategy, programme or plan, and that additional cost-effective
measures to avoid or mitigate against these adverse effects should be
taken, he shall within thirty days of receipt of the documents referred
to in subsection (5), lodge an objection with the person concerned with
a view to reaching agreement on the amendments to be made to the
revised policy, Bill, legislation, strategy, programme or plan in order
to give .effect to the purpose and principles of this Act.
(8) Where, upon direction by the Minister, the Director of
Environment and the person concerned are unable to reach agreement
on the amendments to be made to the revised policy, Bill, legislation,
strategy, programme or plan on the measures to be taken, the Director
of Environment or the person concerned may lodge a notice of.objection
to the Minister.
(9) The Minister may, upon receipt of the notice of objection, order
the documents referred to in subsection ( 6) to be subjected to public
· review or to a public hearing before making a fmal determination.
105.-( 1) Where a mineral or petroleum resource is identified and
before specific details are planned or a hydro-electric power station is
planned or a major water project is planned, the Ministry responsible
for mining, energy or water shall carry out a Strategic Environmental
Assessment.
(2) The Strategic Environmental Assessment provided for under
sub-section (1 ), shall assess 1he area marked for development including the
following-
(a) baseline environmental conditions and status of natural
resources;
(b) identification of ecologically sensitive and protected areas;
( c) identification and description of communities around the
area;
(d) existing socio-economic conditions;
(e) existing economic activities and infrastructure;
(f) · proposed developments, including long term scenarios and
the cumulative development of a number of different mine
or oil and gas site or hydro-electric power stations; 
No. 20 Environmental Management 2004 67
(g) . infrastructure and resources required to service these
development;
(h) potential environmental and social impacts of mining or
petroleum development or hydro-electric power or any
major water projects; and
· · · (i) · recommendations for land reclamation and limitatiops 9n
development in different areas.
(3) The Minister shall direct the Director of Environment to review
the strategic environmental assessment statement and· prepare a report
on adequacy orinadequacy of the statement and areas which need to
be improved and make recommendations to the Minister accordingly.
( 4) The Director of Environment shall submit a review report to
the Minister for approval.
(5). On receipt of recommendations, the Minister shall approve the
report and make recommendations to the Ministry responsible for
mining, .energy or w;:iter reg~ng the best way environment can be
preserved within the context of the project that is io:be undertaken.
( 6) The Ministry responsible for mining, energy or water project
shall be required to comply with recommendations made by the
Minister.
PARTVill
POLLUTION PREVENTION AND CONTROL
106.-(1) It shall be an offence for any person to pollute or pennit
any other person to pollute the environment in violation of any standards
prescribed under this Act or any other written law regulating a segment
of the environment.
(2) In detennining whether or not to issue a licence, permit or other
authoriz.ation to discharge contaminant, and the terms and conditions
of the· licence, pennitor authorization, the Council or any other person
empowered to make the decision shall seek to ensure that the
prescribed best practicable option is adopted.
· (3) For purposes of this section, 'lhe best practicable option," in
relation to the discharge of a contaminant or an emission of noise,
means the· best method for preventing or minimizing adverse effects
on human health, life or the environment.
General
prohibition of
pollution 
68 No. 20 Environmental Management 2004
Powers
of the
Minister
to make
regulations to
·prevent
and control pollution
( 4) No person shall emit any pollutants 'Which cause air pollution in
contravention of standards prescribed or that may be prescribed under
this Act.
(5) No person shall emit or cause to be emitted noise in excess of
standards prescribed or that may be prescribed in relation .. to emission
of noise.
( 6) It shall be an offence for any person to discharge contaminants
or to emit noise without taking into account practicable measures
prescribed in the regulations that may be made by the Minister.
107. The Minister may, in consultation with the Minister responsible
for local government authorities, make further regulations-
(a) preventing and controlling any specified activities that
result in adverse effects on the environment;
(b) requiring any person to monitor discharges of contaminants
and to keep records of the. results of the m~mitori1_1g;
( c) creating systems of integrated pollution prevention and
control;
(d) imposing substantive and procedural requirements on persons
issuing licences and permits under this Act or regulations;
(e) establishing requirements, standards and . guidefines for
preventing and.controlling discharges or emission into the
environment and for activities and the operation of facilities
which may cause discharges or emissions into the
environment;
(f) requiring persons applying for discharge licences to pay
for the administrative costs of dealing with such applications,
including . the reasonable costs of obtaining expert
assistance in dealing with the applications;
(g) classifying ~ischarges, emissions, disposal, facilities,
mobile and stationery sources of pollution and dangerous
· goods;
(h) classifying any new hazardous substances, toxic substances,
potentially toxic substances, environmentally harmful
substances and other types of controlled substances;
(i) · preventing, prohibiting and regulating by such other methods
as by licensing, guidelines, imports, exports, manufacture,
transportation, handling, sale, possession, use, storage, or
disposal of any class of controlled substance or substance
or product containing a controlled substance; 
No. 20 Environmenta/Management 2004 69
(j) incoiporate into domestic regulations latest developments
on international environmental laws and practices;
(k) requiring monitoring of discharges of contaminants into
the environment in areas surrounding the discharges;
(l) establishing standards in relation to the manufacture,
distribution, sale or offering for sale of products · the
manufacture, use or disposal of which may have resulted
or may result in the discharge of a contaminant into the
environment;
(m) in respect of motor vehicles-
(i) requiring, regulating and prohibiting the installation,
maintenance and use of equipment and devices;
(ii) establishing mandatory emission standards and testing
programmes;
(iii) prohibiting the use of any motor vehicle that fails to
comply with an emission standard; and
(iy) prohibiting or regulating the use of motor vehicles in
certain lanes of designated roads ·or in certain parts
of urban areas;
(n) requiring, regulating and restricting the use of notices,
marks and labels on products, packaging and containers;.
< o) prohibiting or regulating in certain· areas, on certain days ·
of the year, or both, the canying out and manner of carrying
out of activities that may result in the discharge of a
contaminant; and
(p) requesting any person to provide infonnation relevant to
the control or prevention of discharge of a contaminant or
an emission of noise. ·
108. The Council may, in order to achieve integrated pollution
prevention and control, prescribe appropriate guidelines on the best
methods for preventing or minimizing adverse effects on the environment
having regard to such matters as:- .
(a) the nature of the disclwge or emission and the sensitivity of
receiving environment to the adverse effects;
(b) the financial implications, and the effect on the environment
of an option when compared _with other options; and
(c) the current state of technical knowledge and the likelihood
that the option can be successfully applied.
lrtegmted
pollution
prevention and
· control 
70 No. 20 Environmental Management 2004
Prohibition of
water
pollution
Prohibition to
discharge
hazardous
· ·sub- · ·
stances,
chemicals,
mate-
. rials, oil .
etc.
109.-(1) Any person who knowingly puts or pennits to be put or to
fall or to be earned into any stream, so as either singly or in combination
with other similar acts of the same nature or interfere with its due flow
or pollute its waters, or puts solid refuse-of any manufactory or
manufacturing process, or puts any rubbish or any other waste or any
. putrid solid' matter into such stream, coinmits an' offence . ..
(2) Any person who causes to fall or flow or knowingly pennits to
fall or flow or to be carried into any stream any poisonous, noxious or
polluting liquid proceeding from any factory or manufacturing
process, commits an offence.
110.-(1) No person shall discharge any hazardous substance,
chemical, oil or mixture containing oil in any waters or any
other segment of the environment except in accordance with guidelines
prescribed under this Act or any other written law.
(2) A person who discharges any hazardous substance, chemical,
oil or mixture containmg oil in any. waters o'r any other segment of the
environment, commits an offence.
(3) Apart from the general punishment provided for under this
Act, the person convicted of an offence under this section may be
ordered by the court- · · · ·· · ·
(a) to pay the cost of removal, including any costs which may be
incurred by the Government or Government agency in the
restoration of the environment damaged or destroyed as a
resuh of the dischalge; and
(b) to pay the cost of third parties in the fonn of reparation,
restoration, restitution or the compensation as may be
detennined by the court.
(4) It shall be the duty of every organization and individual
producing, transporting, trading, using, storing or disposing of
chemicals, oil, toxic 'substances, inflammable or explosive substances,
to comply with regulations prescribed by the Minister on safety for
human and other living beings and avoid causing environmental
degradation.
(5) Without prejudice to any other applicable written law, the
Minister may, in consultation with an appropriate authority stipulate in
the regulations a list of toxic, inflammable or explosives substances
· which are the -subject of prohibition under this-Act. : · 
No. 20 Environmental Management 2004 71
(6) For purposes of regulating the production, storage or
transportation of listed toxic, inflammable or explosive substances
subject of prohibition under subsection (5), the Minister may require
owners or operators of production,. storage or transportation thereof to
mitigate the impact of their activities by-
. (a) giving immediate notice of the discharge, to the Council
and other relevant sector Ministries;
(b) immediately commencing clean-up operations using the
best available clean-up methods;
( c) complying with such directions as the Council may
prescribe.
(7) The Council may seize the production, storage and
transporting facility or motor vehicle or vessel until such time the
owner or operator takes mitigating measures .
. (8) .The Council shall ~k an order of the coui:t f9r the d~~po~ of
production, storage, transporting facility, motor vehicle or vessel if the
owner or operator fails, within prescribed reasonable time, to
take mitigating measures.
· (9) Without prejudice to any other written·taw, the·Counctt·shatl··
ensure that-
(a) location, design, construction and operation of plants in
the atomic energy;
(b) industries, production, transportation, utilization and
storage of radioactive materials;
(c) disposal of radioactive wastes; and
(d) organizations, individuals making use of machinery,
equipment, materials with hannful electro-magnetic
radiation or ionizing radiation,
complies with the provisions of any law or regulations that may be
prescribed for environmental protection, regular check and
Environmental Impact Assessment of their facilities and report
periodically to the Council.
· 111.-(1) It shall be the duty of the Council in collaboration with any
other organ to closely follow developments in technology and
techniques for preventing · or reducing pollution of the environment
due to releases of substances from prescribed processes.
Duty to
keep
abreast
with
technological ·
changes 
72 No. 20 Environmental Management 2004
Duty to
disclose
information to
prevent
pollution
ActNo. __
21 of
2003
Prohibition
notices
on prescribed
process
or activity
(2) Any person carrying out activity impacting on the environment
shall be required to follow a directive that may be issued by the
Council on adaptation of any such developments in technology and
techniques to prevent or reduce pollution of the environment.
112.-(1) For purposes of facilitating pollution pre,vention and
control measures, the Minister may prescribe rules obliging submission of infonnation to either the Council or any designated person, by:
(a) a person who owns or operates an irrigation project
scheme, sewerage system, industrial production plant,
industrial wastes treatment plant, solid waste disposal site
or facility, trading and storage facility for petroleum
products, workshop or any other undertaking which
discharges or is likely to discharge effluents or
other pollutants into the environment; or
(b) any other institution or organ which is required by any
other written law to take measures to prevent pollution
within areas to which it has administrative control or any
other institution or organ that may be identified from time
to time.
(2) The provisions of subsection (1) shall not derogate powers of
the Minister responsible for shipping to make regulation for prevention of
marine pollution pursuant to the provisions of Part XIX of the
Merchant Shipping Act, 2003.
(3) Any person who conttavenes the requirement to furnish infonnation
to the Council or any designated person, commits an offence.
113.-(1) Where the Council is of the opinion that the carrying on of
a prescribed activity or process or the continuing carrying on of any
process or activity in a particular manner involves an imminent risk of
serious pollution of the environment, the Council may serve a prohibition notice on the person carrying on the process or activity. ,
(2) A prohibition notice issued under subsection (1) shall-
(a) specify the environmental risk involved in the activity or
process;
(b) specify the steps that may be taken to the process or
activity to remove it and the period within which such steps
shall be taken;
(c) direct that the authorization shall, until the -notice is
withdrawn partly or wholly to the extent specified in the
notice ceases, to have effect to authorize the carrying on
of the process or activity; and - -- -- ·· 
No. 20 Environmental Mar,agement 2004 73
(d) where, it applies only to a part of the process or activity,
it impose conditions to be observed in carrying on that
other process or activity which is authorized to be carried
on.
PART IX
WASTE MANAGEMENT
(a) Management of Solid Waste
114.-(1) For the purposes of ensuring minimization of the solid
waste in their respective geographical areas of jurisdiction,
local government authorities shall prescribe:
(a) for different types or kinds of waste or refuse or garbage
to be separated at the source;
(b) for standards to guide the type, size, shape, colour and
other specifications for refuse containers used; and
(c) for·mechanisms to be put in place to involve the private
sector and Non-Governmental Organisations on planning,
raising awareness among producers, vendors, transporters,
manufucturers and others on the need to have appropriate
containers and enhance separation of waste at source. .
(2) The local government authorities shall, with respect to their
respective geographical areas of jurisdiction:-
(a) cause to be conducted appropriate Environmental Impact
Assessment for all new major activities leading to proper
management of solid waste;
(b) manage solid waste generated in accordance with sustainable
plans produced by respective local government authority;
and
( d) ensure the appropriate sorting of waste is made right at
the source and in accordance with standards or
specifications prescribed by _the local government
authority concerned.
(3) For the purposes of making decisions on suitability of any
specific method of collection, treatment or disposal of solid waste,
local government authorities shall 1.U1dertake studies within their
respective geographical areas of jurisdiction with a view to instil
knowledge of the rate of local solid waste generation and its
co~_po~ition.
Duty of
local
government to
manage
and minimize
solid
waste 
74 No. 20 Environmental Management 2004
Disposal
of solid
waste
from
markets,
business
areas and
institutions
Storage
of solid
waste
from
industries
Solid
waste
collection in
urban
and rural
areas
115.-(1) Each local government authority shall undertake periodic
studies to determine the type of solid wastes generated from markets,
business areas and institutions and detennine appropriate methods for
sorting, storage or disposal of waste.
(2) In the determination of the appropriate storage or disposal for
solid waste generated by different types of markets, business centres
or areas and institutions within their respective areas, local government
authorities shall ensure that the solid waste is classified and
appropriately stored depending on whether it is oiganic waste, plastics,
glass or metals.
(3) The Minister may prescribe national classifications of solid
waste which local government authorities may adopt for their
respective geographical areas of jurisdictions.
. . J 4) for the purpo~s of this section, "institution" includes schools,
offices, hospitals, police, .army barracks, religious buildings, camps,
convents and any other organization or entity which the Minister may
declare to be an institution for the purposes of solid waste management.
· 116.-(1) The local government authorities shalt. ensure that
industries located within their geographical respective areas of jurisdiction
provide adequate space and facilities for managing all solid
waste generated from such industries before they are collected for
disposal at designated places.
(2) The local government authorities shall ensure that refuse bays
or areas set aside by industries for the collection of solid waste are
clean and protected from flies, animals and scavengers.
(3) The Minister shall, after consultation with the Ministers
responsible for industries, land, health and the local government
authorities prescribe rules on solid wastes to be complied with by various
. categories of industries.
117. The local government authorities shall, with respect to urban
and rural areas, prescribe:
(a) the best ways possible for the collection of various
classifications of solid waste from generation sources and
shall on· its own or with any commercial or private sector
arrange ways to recover the cost incurred in collection of
the solid waste; and 
No. 20 Environmental Management 2004 75
(b) appropriate equipment, time and routes for solid waste
collection.
118.-(1) The local government authorities may designate transfer waste
stations to serve as collection centres of so}id wastes to serve cities, or transfer
municipalities, or towns or other areas where huge amounts of solid stations
waste are generated.
(2) Before a local government authority designates an area to be a
waste transfer station for the purposes of collection of solid waste it
shall:-
(a) carry out social, health and environmental impact assessment;
(b) ensure that the selected area is adequate in size and situated
away from residential area;
(c) ensure regular removal of solid waste to avoid any possible
nuisance; and
(d) ensure the area is fenced off a11d. se.cu_red to preve.nt
unauthorized persons from entering.
119. The local government authorities shall, in choosing the best
me1hod of solid waste disposal for their geographical areas of jurisdiction,
consider the following matters:- ·
(a) climatic conditions;
(b) economic ability;
(c) interest of the community;
(d) environmental, hygienic and social benefits; and
(e) availability of tipping sites.
(b) Management of Litter
120. For the purposes of sections 121 and 122, unless the context
otherwise requires -
'1>ublic land" means land entrusted to the President as trustee and
includes general -land or privately occupied land;
"deposit", in relation to litter; include-
(a) cast, place, throw or drop litter;
(a) allow litter to be cast, thrown, dropped, or to escape, from
any conveyance;
"litter" includes any refuse, rubbish, animal remains, glass, metal,
plastics, garbage, debris, dirt, filth, urine, rubble, ballasts, stones,
earth, sewage, or waste matter, or any other thing of a like nature;
Final
disposal
of solid
waste
Interpret
ation
with
regards
to management
of litter 
76 No. 20 Environmental Management 2004
Control
oflitter
in public
places ·
'l)rivate land" means every place other than a public place;
'l)ublic place" -
(a) includes the following:-
(i) every road, street, private street, footpath, acces~
way, sto_rm water drain, service lane,. court, mall,
thoroughfare, wharf and airport to which the public
generally has access, whether with or without
payment of any fee, and includes any national park
or reserve;
(ii) any park, garden or other place of public recreation
to which the public has access, whether with or
without payment of any fee;
(iii) any beach or foreshore, or the bank of any river or
stream, or the margin of any lake, to which the
public traditionally has access, whether with or
without payment of fee;
(iv) any waters to which the public traditionally has
access, whether with or without payment of any fee,
for bathing or other recreational purposes;
(vv)1
.) every whart: pier or jetty to which the public 1183 access; ( any airport;
(vi) any general land vested in or controlled by the
President being land that is not occupied pursuant to
any lease, licence, or other authority by any private
person;
(viii) any other place whether .public or private. in the
open air to which the public has access, whether
with or without payment of any fee; but
(b) excludes any site designated or approved for the disposal
of waste pursuant to this or any other Act, or any receptacle
installed in a public place.
121.-(1) Every person who has a public place under that person's
control or management shall at all times provide and maintain in that
place, where litter is likely to be deposited, such number of litter
receptacles of suitable construction and. design .. for the temporary
deposit of litter as may reasonably be necessary to keep that place free
from litter.
(2) Where litter generated on or attributable to any particular
premises is likely to be carried from or to otherwise escape from those
premises onto a public place, an Environment Inspector may require
the occupier of the premises to take all reasonable steps to prevent
such litter being carried to or.escaping onto. the public place. : 
No. 20 Environmental Management 2004 77
(3) Where it is shown that, excessive litter is attributable to or
emanates from any particular premises, an Environment Inspector may
require the occupier of the premises to provide and maintain such
number of litter receptacles of suitable construction or design in any
public place adjacent to or within the vicinity of the . land or premises
for the temporary deposit of litter, as may reasonably be necessary to
ensure that the public place be kept free of that litter.
( 4) Where any occupier fails to comply within a reasonable time
with a requirement of an Environment Inspector made under
subsection(2) or (3), the officer may take any reasonable steps to remedy
that default and shall recover the cost of so doing from the occupier as
a debt due to the service.
(5) Every person to whom this section applies shall also make
appropriate provision for emptying the contents of litter receptacles
provided within the public places under that person's control or
management, and for the removal· and disposal of those contents
promptly, efficiently and at regular intervals.
122.-( 1) An Environment Inspector may serve on the occupier of
any private land or any land vested in or controlled by any person, a
notice in writing requiring the occupier, to the satisfaction of the
Inspector to-
(a) clear away, or remove, from the land;
(b) clean up; or
( c) screen, cover, or otherwise obscure from view,
such litter as may be specified in the notice, within such time as may
be so specified.
(c) Management of Liquid Waste
123.-(1) The local government authorities may prescribe and issue
guidelines on how liquid waste from domestic and commercial premises is
to be treated and finally disposed of both within the site and outside
the premises.
(2) Without prejudice to subsection ( 1 ), the Minister may prescribe
specific guidelines to be followed by local government authorities or
sewerage authorities in their disposal of general or specific types of
liquid wastes.
Occupiers
of private land
to clear
litter
On site
disposal
of liquid
waste 
78 No. 20 Environmental Management 2004
Tmnsportation and
disposal
ofliquid
waste
Treatment of
liquid
waste
Liquid
waste
disposal
Control
and
monitor- .
ingof
sewerage
system
Industrial
liquid
waste
Storm
water
management
124. The local government authorities shall, with respect to their
areas of jurisdictions prescribe, issue guidelines and standards on how
sewage from cesspool and sludge from septic tanks is to be collected
and transported by specified vehicles for disposal.
125. The local government authorities shall ensure that sewage is
appropriately treated before it is finally discharged into water bodies
or open land, and that it does not increase the risk of infections or
ecological disturbance and environmental degradation.
126. The local government authorities shalt· designate and ensure
compliance · with designated disposal ponds, sewage treatment
facilities and sewer points.
127. Upon completion of construction of a sewerage system, local
government authorities shall facilitate the carrying out of initial and
subsequent periodic tests ·to ascertain"that the effluent meant for final
disposal meets the standards as may be prescribed by the Minister.
128. . . The Minister shall make regulatio~s prc:~cribing ~e best
method for the treatment of haz.ardous and non haz.ardous liquid
wastes from industries.
129.-(1) Every local government authority shall, within its area of
jurisdiction, build or prepare stonn water drains.
(2) The stonn water drains shall remain clean for the purposes for
which they have been made.
(3) The Minister may make rules providing for:-
(a) standard gradient for stonn water drains to prevent water
stagnation;
(b) the . periodic cleaning of storm . water drains to remove
deposits; and
(c) covered storm water drains, inspection covers and
appropriate trap chambers for inspection and. removal of
deposits. 
No. 20 Environmental Management 2004 79
(d) Management of Gaseous Waste
130. · The local government authorities shall ensure that all
habitable buildings-
(a) have adequate openings to provide through or
cross ventilation; _
(b) provide adequate means of smoke escape in kitchen and
other indoor places as may be appropriate; and
( c) do not provide for cooking in dwelling houses or use of
animal dung as fuel in confined unventilated dwellings.
131.-(1) The local government authorities shall, taking into
consideration of the wind direction and environmental impact assessment
recommendations, ensure that industries producing gas emissions are
located far away from residential areas.
(2) Each local government authority shall prescribe rules,
procedures and penalties governing:
(a) regularity of checks of the machinery to ensure that they
function efficiently and do not produce gas emissions;
and
(b) -specifications-of chimneys and -gas controlling -devices ..
to be fitted to factories and industries.
132.-( 1) The local government authorities shall prescribe rules
specifying emission of carbon monoxide, hydrocarbons, other noxious
emissions and standards for exhaust emissions applicable in areas of
jurisdiction of a local government authority concerned.
(2) Where national standards have been prescribed, the local
government authorities shall adopt the national exhaust emissions
standards.
(e) . Management of Hazardous· Waste
133.-(1) It shall be an offence to import into or export from
Tanzania, hazardous waste without a permit granted by the Minister.
(2) Where hazardous waste is to be exported from Tanzania it shall
be necessary for a person intending to export such waste to obtain a
written permit issued by a competent authority of the receiving country.
Gaseous
wastes
from
dwelling
houses
Control
of industrial
gaseous
waste
Gaseous
and particulate
wastes
from
vehicles
' Importation of
hazardous
waste 
80 No. 20 Environmental Management 2004
Duty of
local
government
authority
in relation to
hazardous
waste
(3) No person shall transport hazardous waste within or through
Tanzania without a pennit granted by the Minister.
(4) The Minister may make regulations prescribing the following:-
(a) best possible ways to manage various types of hazardous
wastes _and_appropriate penalties to any contravention;
(b) responsibility and liability of person involved in any
generation, transportation, export and disposal of
hazardous wastes;
(c) notification procedures in transportation and disposal of
hazardous wastes;
(d) any reporting requirement in implementation of
international conventions on hazardous waste and in
cases of incidents that may have potential to cause damage to
human health, living beings and the environment;
(e) licensed disposal facilities for hazardous wastes;
(f) responsibility and liability of person or group of persons
that have caused contamination of the environmental
ecosystem or owners of such sites;
(g) criteria for classification of sites contaminates with hazardous
wastes; and
· (h) clean up sites contaminated with hazardous .waste.
(5) The Minister may prescribe criteria for the classification of
hazardous wastes with regard to determining their-
(a) hazardous nature;
(b) corrosive nature;
(c) carcinogenic nature;
(d) flammable nature;
(e) persistent nature;
(f) toxic nature;
(g) explosive nature; and
(h) radioactive nature.
134.-(1) Each local government authority shall, with respect to its
area of jurisdiction, ensure that-
(a) standards prescribed for the hazardous waste management
are in place and operational at all the time;
(b) premises producing haz.mdous wms are adequately ventilated
and are in compliance with prescribed standards;
(c) waste effluents are treated or are so modified as to comply
· -with prescribed standards before final-disposal; and 
No.20 Environmental Management 2004 81
( d) hazardous liquid wastes are treated to confonn with
prescribed environmental standards at factory or on site
before their discharge into public sewers or municipal
oxidation ponds or in an open land or into receiving water
bodies.
(2) Any standards and guidelines set by the local government for
the purposes of this Act, shall confonn to standards set under this Act.
135.-(1) The Minister shall ensure that, any movement of
hazardous waste within and through Tanzania shall be conducted in a
manner that prevents or minimizes adverse effects to human health
and the environment and shall confonn to movement procedures as
may be prescribed in the Regulations.,
(2) Any generator of hazardous waste shall take measures to
minimize the generation of such waste.
(3) Any generator of hazardous waste shall be responsible for its
disposal and shall be liable for any damage to human health, living
~m._gs and _the ~nv_~~onm~n~.
136.-( l) Subject to the provisions of subsection (2), disposal of any
hazardous wastes shall be done in an environmentally sound manner.
(2) Environmental Impact Assessment shall be carried out before
hazardous waste is disposed of into soil, land, air or body of water.
137.-(l) The Minister shall, in collaboration with the Minister
responsible for health, ensure that health care wastes are sorted and
stored in prescribed coded containers and transported in refuse trucks
designed and registered for that purpose.
(2) The Minister shall in collaboration with the Minister responsible
for health, prescribe the best possible method for final disposal of various
types of health care wastes.
(3) In this section, ''health care wastes" includes but not limited to
the infectious wastes, pathological wastes, sharps, pharmaceutical,
. genetoxic, radioactive wastes, coagulated blood w.PSte~ .*111d drugs.
Movement of
hazardous
waste
Environmental
Impact
Assessment for
hazardous
waste
Final
disposal
of health
care
wastes 
82 No. 20 Environmental Management . 2004
Disposal
of other
wastes
General
powers
of local
government
authorities to
minimize
waste
Formulation and
approval
ofenvironmenta! quality stan- .
dards
Act No 3
of1975
138. The Minister shall, in collaboration with other sector
Ministries and other authorities, prescribe the best possible. methods
for handling and for disposal of:
(a) veterinary wastes arising froni abattoirs;
(b) veterinary drugs;
( c) waste emanating from agricultural activities;
(d) agro-chemical wastes;
( e) chemical wastes; and
(t) any other type of waste as the Minister may detennine.
139.-(1) Without prejudice to the powers of the local government
authority granted under any wntten law in relation to management of
waste, each local government authority shall have all powers necessary for
purposes of preventing or minimizing solid, liquid, .gaseous and
hazardous waste.
(2) For the purpose of waste.management, the ·Minister.may advise
the Minister responsible for local government authorities to direct or
assign any person powers vested in the local government authority
which has failed to meet its obligation or to exercise such power in
. relation t9 anym~rwhi9h is p~scri~d mtc:l~r~is_P~.. .. ...
(3) Without prejudice to the provisions of subsection (2), the
Minister may, in a fitting case, direct or assign to any ~rson powers
vested in the local government authority which has failed to meet its
obligation or to exercise such powers in relation to any matter which
is prescribed pursuant to the provisions of this Part.
PARTX
ENvlR.ONMENTAL QUALITY STANDARDS
140.-( 1) The National Environmental Standards Committee of
the Tanzania Bureau of Standards established under the Tanzania
Bureau of Standards Act, 1975 shall develop, review and submit to the
Minister proposal for environmental standards and criteria in relation
to-
(a) water quality;
(b) discharge of effluent into water;
(c) air quality;
(d) control of noise and vibration pollution; 
No.20 Environmental Management 2004 83
(e) sub-sonic vibrations;
. (t) soil quality;
(g) control of noxious smells;
(h) light pollution;
(i) electromagnetic waves and microwaves; and
(j) any other environmental quality standard:
(2) The National Environmental Standards 'Committee shall cause
the standards to be published in the· Gazette and in at least two daily
newspapers one of which shall be in Kiswahili and one in English
language with a view to invite comments to be made in writing on the
proposed standards within such period as may be prescribed. < ' • ,
(3) Upon approval of environmental quality standards and criteria
the Minister shall publish them in the Gazette.
141. Every person undertaking any activity shall be required to
comply with environmental quality standards and criteria.
142.-(1) In enforcing environmental quality standards and criteria
the.Council may.-,- . .. . . .. . .. ··-- .
(a) order or carry out investigations of actual or suspected
environmental pollution including the collection of
samples, records and data;
(b) upon reasonable notice served on the occupier enter,
inspect and examine any place, area. premise or any vehicle,
· vessel, boat, aircraft" or any carriage of any description on
which it has reasonable grounds to believe that the activity is
or is likely to lead to violation of environmental standards;
( c) take necessary measures to ensure that·industry and other
facilities adopt cleaner technology to meet the requirements
of standards established under this Act;
(d) · monitor emission concentration and nature ofpollutants
emitted;
( e) make guidelines to minimize greenhouse gases and other
emissions and identify suitable technologies for
minimization of air pollution; or
(f) do or perform anything or act that is necessary for
~he monitoring and control of environmental pollution.
Compliance with
standards, etc
Enforcement of
environmental
quality
standards 
84 No. 20 Environmental Management 2004
Water
quality
standards
Standards
for discharge of
effiuent
into
water
Air quality standards
(2) Subject to the provisions of any other law, any person who pennits
or causes to permit pollution or emission in excess of environmental
quality standards and criteria stipulated pursuant to this Act, commits
an offence.
(3) The C::ouncil shall nuuntain close collaborat,ion with local
government authorities, Public Health Department, Occupational
Health and Safety Agency, Tanzania Bureau of Standards, Tanzania
Atomic Agency, Chief Government Chemist Laboratory Agency,
Tanzania Food and Drugs Authority and such other institutions for the
purposes of enforcement of environmental quality standards.
143. The National Environmental Standards· Committee shall-
(a) prescribe criteria and procedure for measuring standards
for water quality;
(b) establish the minimum quality standards for all waters of
Tanzania;
(c) establish minimum quality standards for different uses of
water including:
(i) drinking water;
(ii) water for agricultural purposes;
(iii) -water for-recreational purposes;
(iv) water for fisheries and wildlife;
(v) water for industry;
(vi) water for environment; and
(vii) water for any other purposes.
144. The National Environmental Standards Committee shall-
(a) establish standards for the discha.J&e of any effluent into
the waters of Tanzania;
(b) establish measures for the treatment of effluent before
their final discharge into sewage systems; and
(c) prescribe requirements for the operator of any plant or
undertaking to undertake such worlcs as it considers necessary
for the treatment of effluent before it is finally discharged -
into water.
145. The National. Environmental Standards_ Committee shall:
(a) prescribe criteria and procedure for measurement for air quality;
(b) establish ambient air quality standards;
( c) establish occupational air quality standards;
(d) establish emission standards for various sources; 
No. 20 Environmental Management 2004 85
(e) prescribe criteria and guidelines for air pollution control
for both mobile and stationary sources; and
(f) any other air emission quality standards.
146. The National Environmental Standards Committee shall-
(a) prescribe procedures for the measurement and detennination
of noxious smells;
(b) set minimum standards for the control of pollution of the
environment by noxious smells; and
(c) prescribe guidelines for measurements and the abatement
of noxious smells, whether from human activities or
natural phenomenon.
147. The National Environmental Standards Committee shall-
(a) prescribe procedures for the measurement and detennination
of noise and vibrations standards;
(b) set minimum standards for emissions of noise and
vibrations pollution into the environment;
( c) establish criteria and procedures for the measurement of
noise and vibration pollution into the environment from
existing and future sources;
(d) prescribe · guidelines for the abatement of unreasonable
noise or vibration pollution emitted to the environment;
( e) establish noise levels and noise emission standards applicable
to construction sites, plants , machinery, motor vehicles,
aircrafts, including sonic booms, industrial and commercial
activities; ·
(f) establish appropriate measures to ensure the abatement and
control of noise frcm soorces refurred to in paragrap:l ( e ); and
(g) measure the levels of noise emanating from sources
referred to in paragraph (e).
148. The National Environmental Standards Committee shall-
(a) prescribe procedures for the measurement and detennination
for emission of sub-sonic vibrations standards;
(b) set minimum standards for emissions of sub-sonic
vibrations into the environment from existing and future
sources;
( c) establish criteria and procedures for the measurement of
sub-sonic vibrations; and
( d) issue , guidelines for the minimization of sub-sonic
vibrations referred to in paragraph (b).
Standards
for the
control
of noxious
smells
Standards
for the
control
of noise
and
vibration
pollution
Standards
for subsonic
vibrations 
86 No. 20 Environmental Management 2004
Standard 149. The National Environmental Standards Committee shalls for
minimization of
radiation
Soil
quality
standards
(a) establish standards for the minimization of ionizing and
other radiation in the environment;
(b) establish criteria and procedures for the measurement
of ionizing and other radiation; .
(c) provide information aimed at warning and protecting
the public and the environment against actual or potential
exposure to radioactive material or ionizing radiation
and prescribe safe practices to protect persons
involved in activities prone to radiation exposure; and
( d) do all things necessary for the monitoring and control
of pollution from radiation.
150. The National Environmental Standards Committee shall-
(a) establish criteria and procedures for the measurement and
determination of the quality of soil;
(b) set minimum standards for the management of the quality
of soil;
(c) prescribe guidelines for the disposal of any. waste in the
soil, the optimal utilization of any soil, identification of
the various soils and practices that are necessary in order
to conserve soil and prohibition of activities that may
degrade the soil; and
(d) do any other thing necessary for the monitoring and
control of soil degradation. 
No. 20 Environmental Management 2004 87
PART XI
ENvlR.ONMENTAL RESTORATION, EASEMENTS
AND CONSERVATION ORDERS
.· (a) Restoration Orders
151.-(1) Subject to any other provisions in this Act, the Council
may issue, on any person in respect to any matter relating to the
m.anagement of the environment, an order known as environmental
restoration order.
(2) An environmental restoration order shall be issued to-
( a) require the person on whom it relates to restore the
environment as near as it may be to a state in which it
was before the taking of the action which is the subject of
the order;
(b) prevent the person on whom it relates from taking any
action which would or is reasonably likely to cause harm
to the environment;
( c) award compensation to be paid by the person on whom it
relates or to other persons whose environment or
livelihood has been banned by the action which is the
subject matter of the order; and
(d) levy a charge on the person on whom it relates which, in
the opinion of the Council, represents a reasonable
estimate of the costs of any action taken by an authorized
person or organization to restore the environment to a
state in which it was before the taking of the action which
is the subject matter of the order.
(3) An environmental· restoration order may contain such tenns
and conditions and may Jmpose such obligations on the persons on
whom it relates as may, enable the order to achieve all or any of the
purposes set under subsection (2).
(4) Without prejudice to the general effect of the purposes set out
in subsection (3), an environmental restoration order may require a
person on whom it relates to-
(a) take such action as shall prevent the commencement or
continuation or cause of pollution;
(b) restore land, including the replacement of soil, replanting of
trees and other flora and the restoration as far as may be, of
outstanding geological, archaeological or historical features
of the land or the area contiguous to the land or sea as may
be specified in the order;
Environmental
restoration
order 
88 No. 20 Environmental Management 2004
Contents
ofenvironmental
restoration
order
(c) take such action to prevent the commencement or
continuation or cause of environmental haz.ard;
( d) cease to take any action which is causing or may contribute
to pollution or an environmental haz.ard;
(e) remove or alleviate any injury to land or the environment or
to the amenities of the area;
(t) prevent damage to the land or the environment, aquifers
beneath the land and flora and fauna in, on or under or
above the land or sea specified in the order or land or the
environment contiguous to the land or sea specified in
the order;
(g) remove any waste or refuse deposited on the land or sea
specified in the order and dispose of the same in
accordance with the provisions of the order; and
(h) pay any compensation specified in the order.
(5) In exercising the powers under this section, the Council shall-
(a) be guided by the principles of good environmental
management in accordance with the provisions of
this Act; and
(b) explain to the persons against whom the order relates the
right of appeal to specified appellate organs.
152.- (1) An environmental restoration order shall specify clearly
and in a manner, which may be easily understood-
( a) activity to which it relates;
(b) . person or persons to whom it is addressed;
( c) time at which it comes into effect;
(d) action which must be taken to remedy the harm to the
environment and the time, being not more than thirty
days or such further period as may be prescribed in the
order,.within which the action must be taken;
( e) powers of the Council to enter any land and undertake
the action specified in paragraph ( d);
( f) penalties which may be imposed if the action specified
in paragraph ( d) is not undertaken; and
(g) right of the person served with an environmental
restoration order to appeal to any prescribed tribunal or
organ against that order, except where the order is issued
by a court of competent jurisdiction, in which case the
right of appeal shall lie to superior courts.
(2) An Environmental Inspector may inspect or cause to be
inspected any activity in order to determine whether that activity is
h~ful to the environment and may take into account the evidence
o6tained from that inspection in any decision on whether or not to
serve an environmental restoration order. 
No. 20 Environmental Management 2004 89
153. Where the Council reasonably suspects that hann has been or Service
ofcnvi- is likely to be caused to the environment by any person's activity, it ronmcnmay serve on that person an order requiring that person to take action tal
within thirty days of the service of the order, to remedy or prevent the ~:'!orahann on the environment as may be specified in the order. order
154. The Council may seek and take into account any technical, Advice
professional and scientific advice which it considers to be desirable for :::g a satisfactory decision to be made on an · environmental restoration cnvironorder. mental
restora155.-( 1) An environmental restoration order shall continue to apply
to an activity in respect of which it was issued notwithstanding that it
has initially been complied with.
(2) A person served with an environmental restoration order shall,
subject to the provisions of this Act, comply with all the tenns. and
conditions of the order.
(b) Easements Orders
_156.- (1) The object of an environmental easement shall be to furthe~ th~ principles of e·n~ironmental. management set ·out in th1s Act .
by facilitating the conservation and enhancement of the environment
through the imposition of one or more obligations in respect of the use
of that land.
(2) Notwithstanding the nature of easements that may be created
in accordance with the. provisions of Part XI of the Land Act, 1999, a
court may, on an application made under this Part, grant an
environmental easement or an environmental conservation order subject to
the provisions of this Act.
(3) The ·Council may recommend to the Minister for the creation
of an easement for the purposes of environmental protection.
(4) Where the Minister is satisfied that, the recommendation of the
Council· is workable,. he shall recommend. to the Minister responsible
for land for purposes of the creation of nght of way in accordance with
Sub-Part 3 of Part XI of the Land Act, 1999.
tion
order
Duration
ofcnvironmcntal
restoration
·order
Environ-
'tncntal
casements
and conservation
order
Act No.
4
of 1999
Act No.
4
of1999 
90 No. 20 · Environmental Management 2004
Application for
. !'l.lVironmental
easements
Enforcement of
environmental
easements
Registration of
environmental
easements
(5) An instrument or a court order creating an easement for
environmental protection shall clearly specify-
(a) the nature of the easement and any conditions, limitations,
and restrictions subject to which it is granted;
(b) the period of time for which it is granted;
(c) the land or particular.part ofit which is'burdened by the
easement;
( d) the land benefited by the easement; and
( e) a plan sufficient to define such easement.
( 6) An environmental easement may be imposed on and shall
thereafter attach to the burdened land in perpetuity or for a tenn of
years or for an equivalent interest under customary law as the court
may detennine.
(7) Notwithstanding the provisions of any written law, easements
created for the purposes of environmental protection shall, unless
rescinded earlier by· court order, subsist beyond the. tenure of the right
of occupancy or lease.
157.-(1) Any pe~n or a group of persons may make an application to
the court for the grant of one or more environmental easements . .. . . '• . . . -~ .. . . . . , . . ..... . '. . . . . -·· . ' ..
(2) The Court may impose such conditions on the grant of an
environmental easement as it considers to be best suited to advance
the object of an environmental easement.
.158.-( 1) Proceedings to enforce an environmental easement may be
commenced .only. by the person in whose .. name the environmental
easement has been issued. · ·
(2) Proceedings in relation to environmental easement may request
the court to-
( a) grant an environmental restoration order; or
(b) grant any remedy available under the law relating to
. easements in respect 6fland.
(3) The court may adjust, so far as it deems necessary, procedures
relating to the enforcement of the requirements of an environmental
easement.
159.-(1) Where an environmental easement is imposed on land, the
title of which is registered under any written law, the environmental
easement shall be registered in accordance with the law prescribing
that.system of registration of easements·. 
No. 20 Environmental Management 2004 91
(2) In addition to any matte.r, which may be required by any
written law generally prescribing registration of ~ents, registration of
environmental easements shall include-
( a) the name of the applicant for the environmental easement
as the person in whose name the environmental easement
is registered;
.. (b) the nature of the easement and any conditions, limitations,
and restrictions subject to which it is granted;
( c) the period of time for which it is granted;
( d) the land, or particular part of it which is burdened by the
easement;
( e) the land benefited by the easement; and
( f) the plan sufficient to def me the easement.
160.(1) Any person who has a legal interest in the land, which is
subject of an environmental easement, shall, in accordance with this
Act. be entitled to compensation commensurate with the lost value of
the land.
(2) Compensation to any value of the land referred to under
subsection (1) shall be made in accordance with the provisions of the
Land A.cquisi#onAct, 1967 .an4 ~e 4m~ A~, 1999.
(c) Conservation Orders
161. For the purpose of environmental management where the
need arise for the creation of ~ent on a burdened land. the authority to
which that land is subject may request the Minister to issue environmental
conservation order so as to-
( a) preserve flora and fauna; .
(b) preserve the quality and flow of water in a dam, lake,
river or aquifer;
( c) preserve any· outstanding geological, physiographical,
ecological, archaeological. or historical features of the
burdened land;
(d) preserve scenic view;
( e) preserve open space;
(f) pennit persons to walk in a defined path. across the burdened
land;
(g) preserve the natural contours and features of the burdened
l~d;
Compensation
for environmen-
. · tal easements
Act No.
43
of1967
·Act No.
4
ofl999
Imposition of
environmental
conservation
order 
92 No. 20 Environmental Management 2004
Designation of
laboratories for
analysis
and taking of
samples··
Designa~
tion of
analysts
and ref- ··
erence
analysts
Certificate
of analysis and
its effect
(h) prevent or restrict the scope of any activity on the burdened
land which has its object in mining and working of minerals or aggregates;
( i) prevent or restrict the scope of any agricultural activity
on the burdened land;
(j) create and maintain works on burdened land so as to
limit or prevent harm to the environment; or
(k) create or maintain migration corridors for wildlife.
PART XII
ANALYSIS AND RECORDS
162. The Council shall by order published in the Gazette,
designate::-
(a) the Chief Government Chemist Laboratory;
(b) arty of the accredited laboratories of public universities;
(c) accredited public laboratories established under or in
pursuance of any written law; and
( d) any accredited private laboratories,
to be laboratories which may, among other things, be used for analytical
and reference for purposes of this Act.
· ·· 163.:.(i) Ari order'designating laboratorie's forputposes of analysis
may also designate Analysts or Reference Analysts from amongst the ··
persons affiliated or working within the designated laboratories.
(2) .An .order designating any laboratories.for purposes of this Act
shall state specific environmental functions of the laboratories, local
limits or subject matter that the laboratory shall serve and the persons appointed as analysts in respect of that laboratory.
164.-(1) A laboratory that has been designated as an analytical or
Reference Laboratory under this Act shall issue a Certificate of
Analysis of any substance submitted to it pursuant to this Act.
(2) A certificate of Analysis shall state the methods of analysis
followed and shall be signed by the analyst or reference analyst, as the
case may be.
(3) When made in accordance with this section, a certificate
. issued by the Analyst or Reference Analyst shall be sufficient evidence
of the facts stated in the certificate for all purposes of this Act. .
( 4) The results of any analysis made by the laboratory shall be
open for inspection by all interested parties upon payment of a
prescribed fee. 
No. 20 Environmental Management 2004 93
165. The Council shall, by notice published in the Gazette,
prescribe-
( a) the activities impacting on the environment for which
records shall be kept for the purposes of this Act;
. (b) contents of such records and the manner. in which they shall
· be kept and made available; and
( c) availability at reasonable costs of records so kept for
environmental audit, environmental monitoring and
evaluation, pollution control, inspection and for any other
purposes that may be prescribed.
166.-(1) Records kept in pursuance of section 159 shall be submitted
annually to the Council.
(2) The CoW1cil shall keep and maintain all such records submitted to
it in a manner that maintains the confidentiality of the records .
Record
keeping
of
matters
impacting on
the environment
Annual
submission of
records
. , 167. ,Subject to the needs of confidentiality as circumstances may Disclorequire and any fees which may be prescribed, any person may have · · sure of analytiaccess to any records submitted to the Council under this Act. cal
168. The. Ministerial Advisory Board. of the Government. Chemist
Laboratory Agency shall keep the Council updated on any advice it
receives from the Industrial and Consumer Chemicals Management
and Control Technical Committee established under the Industrial
Consumer (Management and Control) Act 2003, on all matters likely
to adversely affect the environment.
169. The Minister may, after consultation with Ministers responsible
for health, industry, agriculture, science and technology, make rules
prescribing the mode of cooperation between Council, and organs
established under the Industrial and Consumer Chemicals
(Management and Control) Act, 2003, in relation to:
(a) the laboratories designated as fit to issue certificates of
analysis of substances;
(b) the Ministerial Advisory Board; and
( c) the Emergency Response Committees established under
section 8 of Industrial and Consumer Chemicals
. (Management and Control) Act, 2003.
results
Environmental
responsibilities
of the
Government
Chemist
Act No.
3of2003
Prescribing mode
of cooperation
on chemical pollutants 
94 No. 20 Environmental Management 2004
Requirement to
keep the
Council
informed
Act No·.
3 of
2003
Environmental
records
on niin~
ing
activities
Act No.
Sof
1998
170.-( 1) The following institutions shall keep the Council updated
on matters relating to their respective functions· which have or may
have great impact on the environment:
(a) the Tanzania Pesticides Research Institute;
(b) the Tanzania Atomic Energy Commission;
(c) the Tanzania Food, Drugs and Cosmetics Authonty;
(d) the Occupational Health and Safety Authority; and
( e) the Veterinary Council of Tanzania.
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of subsection (1), matters
to which the Council shall require a report are:.-
(a) premises registered for purposes of Industrial and
Consumer Chemicals (Management and Control) Act,
2003;
(b) records of all chemicals produced, imported, exported,
sold, dealt in, stored or used by each of the institutions
referred in subsection (l);
(c) recotds of orders banning, re&1ricting or otherwise eliminating
the chemicals which are ordinarily used by each of the
institutions referred to in subsection (l);
. (d) in.relation to institutions ref~med. 1:9. in sul>se9ti.<>1': (1) -
(i) distribution of inspectors and analysts;
(ii) labelling and packaging;
(iii) disposals of wastes; and
(iv) decommissioning of plants.
171.-( 1) Without prejudice to the exercise of his powers under the
Mining Act, 1998, the Commissioner for Minerals through Sector
Environment Coordinator responsible for mining shall forward to the
Council as public records, copies of the following documents relating
to the environment-
(a) environmental matters contained in any development
agreements that are required ·to be made between the
Government and the holder of a mineral right or an
applicant for a mineral right;
(b) environmental studies and assessments made by
appropriate experts or consultants which are
required to accompany applications for retention
licences showing any impact on the environment and
the manner the applicant proposes to prevent, eliminate or . •.. -ininimjse ~y adverse effects on the environment 
No. 20 Environmental Management 2004 95
( c) any such terms and conditions o~ protection and
preservation of the environment which may be
implied into mineral retention licences or mineral
development agreements;
(d) such environmental management plans, or proposals for
prevention of pollution, or plans for treatment of waste,
or plans for reclamation of land and water resources, or
plans for minimising the adverse effects on the environment
resulting from mining operations, that may be prepared
by applicants for special mining licences; ·
(e) environmental impact assessments on any proposed mining
operations commissioned by the applicants for special
mining licences to the Minister responsible for minerals;
(f) environmental management plans appended to the special
mining licences; and
(g) environmental management plans in respect of mining
operations. prq,anxl bY, app~icants seeking to renew special
mining licences and any such refusal to renew on accdoot
of impact on the environment.
(2) Director of the Environment may give general or specific
directive in consultation with the C<>.mmissioner {or Mi~erals to Se9tor
Environment Coordinator responsible for mining on any matter
pertaining to the implementation of provisions on environmental
management falling under the Mining Act,·· 1998. ·
(3) The Council shall keep and maintain copies constituting
records received under this section as public records accessible to the
public upon payment of a prescribed fee.
PARTXIll
ENvlR.ONMENTAL INFORMATION, EDUCATION
AND RESEARCH
172.-( 1) Every citizen of Tanzania shall, subject to .the provisions
of subsection (2) and regulations made by the Minister, have freedom
of access to publicly held information relating to the implementation
of this Act and to the state of the environment and actual and future
threats to the environment, including any emissions. to .water, air or
land as well as the disposal and storage ·ofhazardous waste.
(2) A reque~ for information made pursuant to subsection ( 1) may
]>e refuse,<:l- .
Freedom
of access
to
environmental
information 
96 No. 20 Environmental Management 2004
Powers
ofthe
Council
to collect,
analyse
and disseminate
environmental
information
(a) if information 1D be sought would involve supply of unfinished
documents or data or internal communications, or where
the request is manifestly unreasonable or fonnulated in
too general manner;
(b) if the public order or national security would be affected
by supply of the. infonnation . sought;
( c) for the reasonable protection of trade or industrial secrets;
( d) if the request is too vague or uncertain to enable
identification of the infonnation sought; or
(e) if the organ on which the request is made is unaware of the
existence of the infonnation sought.
(3) In the event of a request for infonnation being refused, the
body so refusing shall be obliged to furnish written reasons for the
refusal.
( 4) The Director of Environment and the Director General shall
have access to Jnfonnation relating to the implementation of this Act
and to the state. of the environment and to the actual and ·future threats
to the environment including any emissions to water, air or land a.9
well as the disposal and storage of hazardous waste necessary to
enable them to carry out their respective duties in terms of the
provisions of this Act oi ariy ·other written 1aw· relating to.the protection of
the environment and the utilisation of natural resources.
(5) It shall be an offence to refuse to give infonnation requested by
the Director of Environment or the Director General for the purposes
of perfonnance of their respective functions or the exercise of their
powers under this Act.
173. The Council shall-
(a) gather infonnation on the environment and natural
resources on the existing data;
(b) subject to any other written law, have access to any data
collection on the environment and natural resources;
( c) analyse infonnation relating to the environment and natu·
ral resources;
(d) dissemin~ infonnation to public and private users;
(e) commission studies in demographic and trend.s impacting
on environmental and development issues;
(t) carry out public infonnation and education campaigns in
the field of environment; 
No.20 · Environmental Management 2004 97
(g) exchange information relating to environment with
Non-Governmental Organisations or any other regional
and international organisations;
(h) co-ominate the management of environmental infonnation
with Sector Ministries;
·(i) advise the Minister on existing information gaps and
needs; or
(j) establish in consultation with Sector Ministries, guidelines
and principles for the gathering, processing and
dissemination of environmental information.
174. The Council shall establish and operate a Central
Environmental Information System which may bring together any
findings, data and statistics generated by both public and private
institutions in the course of environmental observation and management.
175.-(1) The Director of Environment shall in every two years,
publish a report on the state of the environment and environment
management which shall also be tabled before the National Assembly.
(2) The Director of Environment may publish any other information he
considers necessary for public education on the environment and other
environmental issues.
176.-(1) The Director of Environment shall, in consultation with
the relevant Sector Ministries, take appropriate measures for
the integration of environment matters in schools, colleges and
institutions of higher learning'._ .
(2) The Director of Environment shall plan and conduct
programmes aimed at raising awareness of the people on sustainable
development and environmental management.
177.-(1) The Council shall conduct surveys on the state of
the environment and may research and make forecast on environmental
changes and other studies that may contribute to the formulation of
policies and preparation of action plans and strategies with regard to
environmental conservation and· management.
Central
Environmental
Information
System
State of
the
Environ
ment
Report
Environmental
education and
awareness
Environmental
research 
98 No. 20 Environmental Management 2004
l>ublic
participation in
environmental
decision
making
(2) Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection ( 1 ), the Minister
may designate any institution as an advisory body charged with
responsibility of enhancement of targeted scientific research,
information generation in the field of environment, monitoring and
assessment of effectiveness of actions taken.
PART XIV
PuBLIC PARTICIPATION IN ENvlRONMENTAL DECISION MAKING
178.-(1) The public shall have the right to be timely informed of the
intention of public authorities to make executive or legislative decisions
affecting the environment and of available opportunities to participate
in such decisions.
(2) The public shall have the right to participate in decisions
concerning the design of environmental policies, strategies, plans and
programmes and to participate in the preparation of laws and regulations
relating to the environment'. .
(3) Information relating to decisions affecting the environment ·
may be made available to the public before the date on which the
decision is to be niade. · ·· · ·
(4) Public involvement in environmental decision-making shall be
made through-
(a) early and accessible notice of the intention to make the
decision, such as, formulation of policies, plans and
programmes relating to the environment;
· (b) indication of opportunities for the public to present oral
and written comments on proposed policies, plans and
programmes;and
( c) access to environmental information subject to this Act or
ariy other written law. -
(5) The Council and other relevant authorities shall establish
mechanisms to collect and respond to public comments, concerns and
questions related to the environment including'-
(a) public debates and hearings; and
(b) environmental information, registries and complaints
· · desks in all public institutions. · 
No. 20 Environmental Management 2004 99
PART XV
INTERNATIONAL AGREEMENTS
179.-(1) Where, the United Republic is a party to an international or
regional agreement concerning the management of the environment, the
Minister shall, in consultation with the relevant sector Ministry-
(a) initiate and prepare legislative proposals for consideration by
the relevant Ministry for purposes of implementing those
agreements; and
(b) identify appropriate measures necessary for the
implementation of those agreements.
(2) Where a Sector Ministry is involved in negotiation of an
international agreement on matters relating to protection and management
of environment, the Sector Minister concerned shall, prior to submission
for ratification by the National Assembly, communicate to the Minister
on the substance of the agreement with a view to assess the likely
impact on the environment.
(3) The Minister shall create mechanism to work closely with
international and regional communities to contribute towards peaceful,
healthier and better global environment for the present and future
generation.
( 4) The Director of Environment shall keep a register of all
international agreements concerning the management of the environment
to which the United Republic is a party.
180.-(1) The Minister may, in consultation with relevant Ministries,
initiate discussion with relevant authorities of neighbouring countries
on environmental management programmes and measures to avoid
and minimize such transboundary environmental impacts.
(2) The Director of Environment shall, in cooperation with sector
Ministries or government agencies, initiate and implement transboundary
environmental management programmes with neighbouring countries.
181. Wlthout prejudice to the preceding provisions of this Part, the
Director of Environment may establish a national office or national
focal point of implementation of international agreements on environment.
International
Agreements on
Environment
Transbou
-ndary
environmental
management
·programmes
Establish
-ment of
national
offices
and focal
points 
100 No. 20 Environmental Management 2004
Appointment and
designation of
environ-
... mental
inspectors
Powers
of
environmental
inspectors
PART XVI
COMPLIANCE AND ENFORCEMENT
182.-(1) There shall be appointed, by the Minister, environmental
inspectors among the employees of the Council.
(2) The Minister may designate in writing any employee of local
government authorities, ministries or any other public institution either
by name or office, to be an environmental inspector for the purpose of·
this Act.
(3) The Director of Public Prosecutions may designate an
environmental officer to be a public prosecutor upon recommendation
of the Minister.
183.-(1) The environmental inspector appointed or designated as
such may, with or without a warrant, at any reasonable time and with
any necessary assistance-
(a) enter into or upon any building, vehicle, air.craft, vessel,
land, waters, or other place, other than place actually or
habitually used as a dwelling house;
(b) stop any vehicle or vessel that he reasonably believes as•
"(i) being operated in contravention of this Act; and
(ii) discharging or has discharged a contaminant in
contravention of this Act;
( c) take samples;
(d) take photographs and videos;
( e) record or copy any information by any method;
(f) require the production of any document, record or other
thing that is required to be kept under this Act, and any
other document' that is related 'to the:' 'purposes of the
inspection and remove it for the purpose of making
copies or extracts, provided that nothing shall be removed
without providing a receipt;
(g) inspect, seize and take copies of any documents which
may constitute evidence of the commission of an offence
under this Act;
(h) make reasonable inquiries of any person, orally or in
writing;
(i) seize any vessel, vehicle, aircraft or equipment that the
inspector has reasonable grounds to believe has been
used in the commission of an offence under this Act; and 
No. 20 Environmental Management 2004 101
(j) order removal of any waste or other substance or thing
deposited or discharged in contravention of this Act.
(2) An environmental inspector acting under subsection (1) shall,
upon demand of any occupant, show the inspector's identification card
and shall explain.the purpose of inspection.
(3) Any person who is asked by an environmental inspector taking
action under subsection ( l) to do any thing that is necessary in order
to enable the environmental inspector to carry out that action, shall
immediately comply with the request.
184. Any person who-
(a) fails to submit a project brief contrmy to the provisions of
section 86 (1); .
(b) fails to prepare an Environmental Impact Assessment
report as required under any provision of this Act; or
( c) fraudulently makes a false statement on an environmental
impact assessment report submitted under this Act,
commits an offence and is liable on conviction to a fine of not less than
five hundred thound shillings but not exceeding ten million shillings
or to imprisonment for a term of not less than two years but not
exceeding seven years or to both.
185. Any person who-
(a) fails to keep records of the activities, products, by- products,
and wastes required to be kept by this Act; or
(b) fraudulently alters any records required by this Act,
commits an offence and is liable on conviction to a fine of not less than
five hundred thousand shillings but not exceeding ten million
shillings or to imprisonment for a term of not less than two years but
not exceeding seven years or to both.
186. Any person_who-
(a) contravenes any environmental standards or guidelines
for which 110 other penalty is specifically provided for; or
(b) contravenes a measure prescribed under this Act for
which no other penalty is specifically provided,
commits an offence and is liable on conviction to a fme of not less
than two million shillings but not exceeding ten million shillings or to
imprisonment for a term of not less than two years but not exceeding
seven years or to both.
Offences
relating
to environmenta!
impact
assessment
Offences
relating
to
records
Offences
relating
to environmenta! standards 
102 No. 20 Environmental Management 2004
Offences 187.-(1) Any person whorelating (a)
to pollu- dischatges any dangerous materials, substances, oil, oil
mixtures into land, water, air, or aquatic environment tion
Offences
relating
to biological
diversity
Offences
relating
to environmental
restoration,
casement
and conservation
orders
contrary to the provisions of this Act; .
(b). pollutes the environm.ent contrary to 1:he. provisions of
this Act; or
( c) dischatges any pollutant into the environment contrary to
the provisions of this Act,
commits an offence and is liable on conviction to a fine of not less than
three million shillings but not exceeding fifty million shillings or to
imprisonment for a term not exceeding twelve years, or to both.
(2) In addition to any sentence that the court may impose upon a
person convicted pursuant to the provisions of subsection ( 1 ), the court
may direct that person to-
(a) pay the full cost of cleaning up the polluted environment
and of removing the pollution; or
(b) clean up the polluted environment and remove the effects
of pollution to the satisfaction of the Council.
(3) Without prejudice to the provisions of subsections (1) and (2),
the court may direct the polluter to meet the cost of injury or effect of
the pollution to any third parties through adequate compensation,
restoration or restitution.
188. A person who-
(a) trades;
(b) possesses; or
( c) disturbs the habitat,
of a component of biological diversity in contravention of guidelines
and measures prescribed under sections 66, 67 and 68 or other provisions
of this Act, commits, an offence and shall be liable on conviction to a
fine not exceeding ten million shillings or to imprisonment for a term
not exceeding five years or to both. ·
189. Any person who-
(a) fails, neglects or refuses to comply with an environmental
restoration order made under this Act; .
(b) fails, neglects or refuses to comply with an erivironmental
easement, issued under this Act; ~d 
No. 20 Environmental Management 2004 103
(c) fails, neglects or refuses to comply with an environmental
conservation order made under this Act,
commits an offence and shall on conviction be liable to a fine not
exceeding ten million shillings or to imprisonment for a term not
exceeding five years, or to both.
190,-( 1) Every person commits an offence who, without
reasonable excuse or lawful justification-
(a) deposits any litter in or on any public place; or
(b) deposits any litter in or on any private land without the
consent of its occupier; or
(c) deposits any litter in or on any private land in the ownership
or possession of a person who does not reside in
Tanzania, whether or not that person consents to it;
(d) deposits any inorganic litter in or on any land other than
land designated or approved for the disposal of waste,
(e) having deposited any litter (whether inadvertently or
otherwise) in or on any public place, or in or on any private
land without the consent of its occupier, leaves the litter .
there after having been requested by an environment
inspector to remove it; or; . _ ....
(f) refuses or fails to comply with the provisions of section
121,or
(g) refuses or fails to comply with a requirement made under
section 122, or
(h) refuses or fails to comply with a notice issued under
section 122 or refuses or fails to comply with a decision
of the permitting authority under that section,
and on conviction shall be liable, in the case of an individual, to a fme
not exceeding one million shillings and in the case of a body corporate, to
a fine not exceeding five million shillings .
(2) Where any person is convicted of an offence against this
section, the court shall in addition to imposing a penalty, order the
offender, under the supervision and to the satisfaction of a person
nominated by the court, to clear up and remove the deposited litter
within such period and to such place as 11,1ay be specified in the order,
and on the making of any such order, the court shall further order that
if the offender fails to comply with the order he is liable in addition to
any other· penalty imposed, to a fine not exceeding five hundred
thousand shillings.
Offences
relating
to litter 
104 No. 20 Environmental Management 2004
(3) Where the court convicts a person of an offence against this
section, the court may, if it thinks fit, in addition to imposing of penalty,
order the offender to pay by way of compensation to the public authority
having the control or management of the public place or as the case
may be, the occupier of the private land where the offence was committed,
such sum as it considers reasonable to cover the cost of the removal of
the litter, and the amount so awarded shall be deemed to be a judgment
debt due to the authority or occupier from the offender, and may be
enforced in any manner in which a judgment or order of the court for
the payment of a civil debt may be enforced.
General 191. Any person, who commits an offence against any provision
penalty of this Act for which no other penalty is specifically provided for shall,
on conviction be· liable to a fine of not less than fifty thousand
shillings but not exceeding fifty million shillings or to imprisonment
for a term of not less than three months but not exceeding seven years
or to both.
Civil lia- 192.-(1) A conviction for an offence committed under this Act,
bility shall not exonerate any person or body corporate from any civil
proceeding which may be instituted under this Act.
Forfeiture,
cancellation,
commu-·
nity
service
and other
orders
(2) No person shall be deemed to have committed an offence by
virtue of subsection ( 1) if that person proves that the offence was
committed without his knowledge or connivance and that he exercised
all due care and diligence to prevent the commission of the offence
having regard to all the circumstances.
193.-(1) The court, before which a person is chaiged with an
offence against this Act or any regulations made under this Act, may
direct that, in addition to any other order-
(a) upon the conviction of the accused; or
(b) if it is satisfied that an offence .· was committed
notwithstanding that no person has been convicted of the
offence,
order that the substances, equipment and appliances used in the
commission of the offence be forfeited to the Government and, be or
disposed ofin the manner as the court may determine. 
No. 20 Environmental Management 2004 105
(2) In making an order under. subsection (1), the court may also
order that the cost of disposing of the substances, equipment and
appliances referred to in subsection (1), be borne by the accused.
(3) The court may further order that any licence, permit or other
authorization given under this Act and to which the offence relates be cancelled. · · · ··
(4) In addition to any fine imposed upon by the court, the court
may order the accused person to do community work, which promotes
the protection of the environment.
(5) Without prejudice to the generality of this section, the court
may also issue an environmental restoration order against the accused
in accordances with this Act, regulations, guidelines or standards made
under this Act.
194.-(1) The Director General, or an environmental inspector may,
subject to and in accordance with the provisions of this Act, if
circumstances show that a person, corporate or unincorporated, has
committed an offence against this Act in respect to which he has
showed willingness to pay a fine, compound such offence by ac.cepting
.. from such person a sum of money together with an. instrument, alticle,
vehicle or any other thing, if any, in respect of which the offence has
been committed.
(2) Subject to the provisions of this Act authorizing any measure
that may be taken in addition to a fine that may otherwise be taken
pursuant to an order of the tribunal or court, no further criminal or, as
the case may be, civil proceedings shall be taken against a person in
respect of whom powers to compound offence has been exercised.
195.-(1) Where the Council has reasonable grounds to believe that,
a person is or will be conducting an activity, or is or will be in possession
or control of a substance or thing that ma:y result in an adverse effect
on the environment or public health it may serve a prevention order on
that person.
(2) A prevention order may require the person against whom it is
made-
(a) to create a written emergency response plan that is
adequate to reduce or eliminate the risk;
Compounding of
offences
Prevention
order to
protect
the
environment 
106 No. 20 Environmental Management 2004
Protection
order
against
activities
adverse
on the
environment
(b) to provide a copy of that plan to the Council;
(c) to have any necessary equipment, facilities and trained
personnel available to deal with the risk;
(d) upon an identified event or set of ciroumstances occurring, to
implement the plan; and
( e) · to take whatever other measures which may be necessary
to ensure that any emeigency can be effectively responded
to.
(3) Any person on whom a prevention order is served shall comply
with the requirements of the order by the date or dates specified in the
order and if no date is specified, that person shall comply with the
order immediately.
(4) A person who contravenes sub-section (3), commits an
offence and shall , on conviction, be liable to a fine of not more than
. one million shillings or to imprisonment for a term not exceeding one
year and where that person fails to comply with a requirement specified in
the prevention order within the time specified, that person shall be
liable to a further fine not exceeding one hundred thousand shillings
for every day or part ofa .day after the ~ ~ified inJhe ord~r during
which the offence continued. ·
(5) Any person on whom a prevention order has been served may
apply to the Minister for a review in accordance with procedure that
the Minister may prescribe.
196.-(1) Where the Council has reasonable grounds to believe
that an activity is resulting in or is likely to result in an adverse effect
to the environment or public health, it may serve a protection order on -
(a) the owner, manager or person in control of the premises,
vehicle, vessel, aircraft· or equipment where the activity
is occurring or will. occur; ·
(b) any person who caused or permitted the activity.
(2) A protection order may require the person on whom it is served
to take any measures .that will assist in avoiding, remedying or mitigating
the adverse effects and, without limitation to the generality of subsection
( l), to take any measure to-
No. 20 Environmental Management 2004 107
(a) stop the activity that is resulting in or is likely to result
in, an adverse effect;
(b) control the activity;
(c) assess the actual or anticipated extent of the adverse
effect;
(d) remedy an adverse · effect caused by the activity; or
( e) to prevent a recurrence of the activity or the adverse effect.
(3) Any person on whom a protection order is served, shall comply
with the requirements of the order by the date or dates specified in the
order and if no date is specified, that person shall comply with the
order immediately.
(4) A person who contravenes sub- section (3), commits an offence
and shall, on conviction, be liable to a fine of not exceeding one million
shillings or to imprisonment to a term not exceeding one year and
where the person failed to comply with a requirement specified in the
pl'Qtecti~n order within the time specified, to .a further fine not ~~ng
one hundred thousand shillings for every day or part of a day after the
date specified in the order during which the offence continued.
(5) Any person on whom a protection order has been served may
· apply to the Minister for a .review. in. accordance with. the procedure
that the Minister may prescribe.
197 .-( 1) Any Environmental Inspector who observes the discluuge
of a contaminant into the environment in an amount, concentration or
manner that constitutes a risk to human health or property or that
causes or has the potential to cause adverse effects on the environment
may serve an emergency protection order on-
(a) the owner~ manager or person in control of the premises,
vehicle, vessel, aircraft or equipment from which the
discluuge was or is being made;
(b) any person who, at the time when the discharge
· occurred, was the owner, manager of person in control of
the premises, vehicle, vessel, aircraft or equipment from
which the discharge was made; or
(c) any person who caused or permitted the discharge.
(2) An emergency protection order may require the person on
whom it is served to take any measures that will assist in reducing or
eliminating the risk or harm and without limitation to generality of the .
foregoing, to take . any measures:-
Emergency
protection
order 
108 No. 20 Environmental Management 2004
Environmental
compliance
order
(a) to stop the discharge;
(b) to control the discharge;
( c) to clean up or remove the contaminant or other substance
from any place; or
(d) to prevent a recurrence of the discharge.
(3) Any person on whom an emergency protection order is served
shall comply with the requirements of the order by the date or dates
specified in the order and if no date is specified that person shall comply with the order immediately.
(4) A person who contravenes subsection (3), commits an offence
and shall, on conviction, be liable to a fine not exceeding ten million
shillings or to imprisonment to a term not exceeding one year and if
the person failed to comply with a requirement specified in the order
within the time specified, that person shall be liable to a further fme
not exceeding one hundred thousand shilling for every day or part of
a day after the date specified in the order during which the offence
continued.
(5) Any person on whom an emergency protection or:der .~as been
served may apply to the Minister for a review in accordance with
procedure that the Minister may prescribe.
198,-(1) Where the Council has reason to believe that any
condition of a licence issued in relation to the conduct of any activity
has been breached, the Council may serve a compliance order on the
licence holder requiring that person to remedy the breach.within a
reasonable period stipulated in the order failure of which the Council
may require the competent authority issuing such licence to cancel
such licence.
(2) The compliance order may-
( a) temporarily suspend the licence with immediate effect or
otherwise as the Council may consider to be that this is
necessary to prevent or mitigate an imminent risk of
significant adverse effects to the environment or to human
health occurring; and
(b) require the licence holder to take specified measures to
prevent or abate any adverse effect. 
No. 20 Environmental Management 2004 109
(3) Where the licensee fails to comply with the compliance order,
the Council may-
(a) take the necessary steps to remedy the breach and recover
the cost from the licence holder;
(b) ask the relevant authority to alter the conditions of the
licence; or · · ·
( c) cause revocation of the licence.
(4) Any person on whom a compliance order is served shall comply
with the requirements of the order by the date or dates specified in the
order and ifno date is specified, the person shall comply with the order
immediately.
(5) A person who contravenes sub-section ( 4), commits an offence
and shall, on conviction, be liable to a fine not exceeding ten million
shillings or to imprisonment to a term not exceeding one year and if
the person failed to comply with a requirement specified in the order
within the time specified, that person shall be liable to a further fine
not exceeding one hundred thousand shilling for every· day or part of
a day after the date specified in the order during which the offence
continued.
( 6) Any person on whom a compliance order has been served may
apply to the Minister for a review in accordance with procedure that
the Minister may prescribe.
199.-(1) Where any person fails to comply with any requirement Cost
in an order under this part, the Council may cause the required order
measures to be taken and may issue a cost order requiring that person
to reimburse the Council for the cost of taking the measures.
(2) Any person to whom a cost order has been issued may,
within thirty days of the order being served, apply to the Minister for
a review of the order in accordance with procedure that the Minister
may prescribe.
(3) Where no application for the review of a cost order is made
within the period specified in sub-section (2), the order for cost may
be enforced as if it were an order of court. · 
110 No. 20 Environmental Management 2004
Offences
in relation to
environmental
inspectors
Liabiiity
of managers of
bodies
corporate
200. It shall be an offence for any person who-
(a) hinders or obstructs an environmental inspector in the
execution of his duties under this Act;
(b) fails to comply with a lawful order or requirements made
by any environmental inspector in accordance with this
Act· ' ( c) refuses an environmental inspector entry upon any land
or into any premises which he is empowered to enter by
this Act;
(d) impersonates an environmental inspector;
( e) refuses an environmental inspector access to records kept
in accordance with this Act;
(f) fails to state or wrongly states his name or address to an
environmental inspector in the course of his duties under
this Act; or
(g) misleads or gives wrong infonnation to an environmental
. inspector under this Act,
commits an offence and is liable on conviction, to a fine not exceeding five
million shillings or to imprisonment for a tenn not exceeding seven
years or to both such fine and imprisonment.
201.-(l)Where a body corporatti colllll1its an ·offence under this
Act, every director or partner and any other person concerned in the
management of that body corporate, commits the offence unless that
person proves that-
(a) the offence was committed without his consent or
connivance; and
(b) the person exercised all such diligence to prevent the
commission of the offence as ought to have been exercised
by that pefSOn having regard to the nature of his functions
in that capacity and to all the circumstances.
(2) Every director or partner and any other person concerned in
the management of, a body corporate to which a licence or order has
been issued under this Act shall take all reasonable steps to prevent
that body corporate from contravening or failing to comply with the
licence or order.
(3) A person who contravenes the provisions of subsection (2),
commits an offence and shall, on conviction be liable to a fine not
exceeding five million shillings or to imprisonment to a tenn not
exceeding one year or to both such fine and imprisonment. 
No. 20 Environmental Management 2004 111
202. An individual or legal persons may bring action and seek
appropriate relief in respect of any breach, . violation or threatened
breach or violation of any provision .of this Act or of any use
of article, substance or natural resources-
(a) in that individual's or legal persons own interest;
(b) in the interest or on behalf of a person who is, for practical
reasons, unable to bring such action;
(c) in the interest of or on behalf of a group or class of person
whose interests are affected;
(d) in the public interest; and
( e) in the interest of the environment or other habitats.
203.-( 1) Except as otherwise specified in this Act, it shall be a
defence for a person charged to prove that he took all reasonable
precautions and exercised all such diligence to prevent the commission of
the offence as ought to have been exercised by that person having
regard to all surrounding circumstances.
(2) It shall not be a defence to a charge under this Act that the
defendant was rendered unable to comply with any order or perfomt
any act or function or an act or omission of another person that would
have likewise constituted a contravention of this Act.
PART XVII
ENvlRONMENTAL APPEALS TRIBUNAL
204.-( 1) There shall be established the Environmental Appeals
Tribunal which shall consist of-
(a) a Chaimtan who shall be appointed by the President from
amongst the persons qualified to be appointed a Judge;
(b) an advocate of the High Court of Tanzania recommended
by the Tanganyika Law Society;
(c) one member with high academic qualifications and
experience in environmental law_; and
(d) two other members who have demonstrated exemplary
professional competence in the field of environmental
management.
(2) The members referred to in paragraphs (b), (c) and (d) shall be
appointed by the Minister.
(3) The Chairman and other members shall hold office for a temt
.. ofthree years and shall be eligible for reappoin1rnent forJurther Qne temt.
Right of
individual and
legal
persons
to sue
Defences
Establishment and
composition of
the
Tribunal 
112 No. 20 Environmental Management 2004
Sources
of funds
for the
Tribunal
Jurisdiction of
the
. Tribunal
(4) The appointment of members of the Tribunal shall be made at
different times so that the respective expiry dates of their terms of
office shall fall at different times.
(5) The Chairman of the Tribunal may invite any persons with
· · special skills or knowledge on environmental issues which ;are the
subject matter of any proceedings or inquiry before the Tribunal to act
as amicus curiae where it appears to the Tribunal that such special
skills or knowledge are required for proper determination of that matter.
205. The sources of funds for the Tribunal shall consist of-
(a) such amount of money as may be appropriated by
Parliament; and
(b) such sum of money as may be charged on the Fund for
the purpose of enforcement of sustainable management
of the environment.
206.-(1) The Tribunal shall exercise an appellate jurisdiction under
this Act in respect of matters referred before it pursuant to the provisions
of subsection (2) .
(2) Any person who is aggrieved by-
(a) the decision or omission by the Minister;
(b) the imposition of or failure to impose any condition,
limitation or resbiction issued under this Act or the regulations
made under this Act; and
( c) the decision. of the Minister to approve or disapprove an
environmental impact statement,
may within thirty· days after the occurrence of the event against which
he is dissatisfied, appeal to the Tribunal in such manner as may be
prescribed by the Tribunal.
(3) Upon hearing of the appeal, the Tribunal may-
(a) confirm, vary or set aside the order, notice, direction or
decision complained about; or
(b) make such other order as to costs as it may deem fit.
( 4) Where an appeal has been preferred the Tribunal may issue any
order which it may deem necessary in the circumstances of the subject
of appeal. 
No. 20 Environmental Management 2004 113
( 5) Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (2), the Council
may, where it appears to it that a matter involving interpretation of this
Act and which is not contentious or not likely to be subject of further
litigation, refer the matter to the Tribunal for direction.
207.-(1) The Chairman and two members of the Tribunal shall
constitute a quorum.
(2) The Chairman shall preside over the meetings of the Tribunal,
on his absence, by any member elected by members present at that
meeting.
(3) A member of the Tribunal who has interest in any matter which
is the subject of the proceedings before the Tribunal shall not take part
in those proceedings.
(4) The Tribunal shall regulate its own procedure and shall not be
bound by rules of procedure or evidence as set out in the Criminal
Procedure Act, 1985; Civil Procedure Code Act, 1966 and the Law of
Evidence Act, 1967.
(5) Any person who is a party to proceedings before the Tribunal
may appear in person or by an advocate or by a legal representative.
(6) The Tribunal may,·for purposes of proceedings before it-
(a) make such orders intended to secure the attendance of any
person at any place where the Tribunal is sitting,
(b) make such orders for discovery or production of any
document concerning a matter before it or the investigation of
any contravention of this Act as it deems necessary or
expedient;
(c) take evidence on oath and may, for that purpose,
administer oaths; and
( d) summon, on its own motion or upon request, any person as
a witness.
(7) Any person who:
(a) fails to enter appearance before the Tribunal after having
been required to do so;
(b) refuses to take oath before the Tribunal or refuses to produce
any article or document when lawfully required to do so;
(c) knowingly gives false evidence or information which he
knows to be misleading before the Tribunal; and
Proceedings of
the
Tribunal
Acts
Nos. 49
of 1966,
7 of
1967 and
9of
1985 
114 No. 20 Environmenta/Management 2004
Awards
of the
Tribunal
Appeals
to the
High
Court
Immunity
of
members
of the
Tribunal
Remuneration of
members
of the
Tribunal
(d) at any sitting of the Tribunal, interrupts the proceedings or
commits any contempt of the Tribunal,
commits an offence under-this Act.
208~·{1) Jbe Tribunal shall, after hearing the appeal or any matter
referred to it by the Council: · · ·
(a) inquire · into the matter and make an award in form of a
directive, order or recommendation;
(b) notify concerned parties of the award; and
(c) specify the period within which the award is to be complied
with.
(2) The award of the Tribunal shall be binding and may be enforced
as if it were a decree of the court.
209.-( 1) Any party who is aggrieved with the decision or any order
of the Tribunal on a point of law, may. appeal to the High Court
within thirty days of such decision or order.
(2) Every appeal to the High Court shall be heard and determined
by a panel of three Judges.
(3) The decision of the High Court on any appeal under this section
shall be final.
·210.-(1) The Chairman or other members or officers of the
Tribunal shall not be liable for prosecution or sued in any court for an
act done or omitted to be done in good faith in the discharge of their
duty as members or officers of the Tribunal, whether or not within the
limits of their jurisdiction.
(2) No officer of the Tribunal or other person bound to execute the
lawful warrants, orders or other process of the Tribunal shall be liable
for prosecution or be sued in any court for the execution of a warrant,
order or process which he would have been bound to execute within
the limit of the jurisdiction of the Tribunal.
211. There shall be paid to the Chairman and members of the
Tribunal such remuneration and allowances as the Minister shall
determine. 
No. 20 Environmental Management 2004 115
212.-(1) The Chief Justice shall designate any judicial officer to be Appointthe Registrar of the Tribunal. mcnt of
the
(2) The Registrar shall have and perfonn such functions as are Regi9trar
conferred upon him within the jurisdictional functions of the Tribunal
as may be directed by the Chainnan. . .. , .
PARTXVm
NATIONAL ENvlRONMENTAL TR.UST FuNo
213.-(1) There is established a Fund to be known as the National
Environmental Trust Fund into which shall be paid, all moneys
received by the ·Fund.
(2) The sources of money payable into the Fund shall consist of-
(a) such sums of money as may be appropriated by
Parliament;
(b) such sums of money as may be payable to the Fund by
way of donation, gifts, grants, or bequests by the
Government, other agencies, individual persons or
another government or inte~ational organisations;
( c) all other sums or property which may in any mann'er
become payable to or vested in the Fund in respect of
any matter incidental to its powers and duties;
( d) any income generated by any project financed by the
Fund, due allowance being made for any necessary
expenses which may be met by any· such project; and
( e) a levy · of the amount to be detennined by the Minister
in the regulations from every prescribed fee payable
under this Act.
(3) There may be charged on and paid out of the Fund all such
sums of money as may be expended for management of environment
and administrative functions of the Fund.
214.- (1) The objectives of the Trust Fund shall be-
(a) to facilitate research intended to further the requirement
of environmental management;
(b) to foster capacity building;
(c) to confer environmental awards;
Establishment of
the
National
Environmental
Trust
Fund
~ves
of the
Fund 
116 No. 20 Environmental Management 2004
Composition and
administration of
the Fund
Annual
accounts
and audit
of the
Fund
ActNo. 6
of2001
(d) to issue environmental publications;
(e) to provide scholarships;
(f) to promote and assist, through grants, community
based environmental management programmes; and
(g) to pay for the costs .. of the . meetings of the N,ational
. Environmental Advisory 'Committee and of the Board
of Trustees.
(2) The Board of Trustees may, on recommendation of the National
Environmental Advisory·Committee, determine that certain donations
of the Trust Fund be applied specifically for prizes and awards for
exemplary services to the environment and to be applied by the recipient
exclusively to the management of the environment.
215.-( I) The Fund shall vest in the Board of Trustees and be
administered as such.
(2) The Board of Trustees shall be appointed by the Minister and
shall consist of persons who possess the qualities prescribed in the
Fourth Schedule to this Act.
(3) The Director of Environment shall be the accounting officer of
the Fund and shall, subject to any specific direction of the Board of
Trustees, manage the Fund in accordance with sound and prudent
public financial practice.
216.-(1) The Board of Trustees shall cause to be kept and
maintained proper books of accounts and records with respect to--
(a) the receipt and expenditure of moneys and other
financial transactions of the Fund;
(b) the assets and liabilities of the Fund,
and shall cause to be made out, for every financial year, a balance
sheet and a statement showing details of the income and expenditure
of the Fund and all its assets and liabilities.
(2) Not later than six months after the close of every financial year,
the accounts including the balance sheet of the Fund relating to that
financial year shall be audited by the Controller and Auditor General
in accordance with the provisions of the Public Finance Act, 2001.
(3) As soon as the accounts of the Fund have been audited, and
in any case not later than six months after such audit, the Board of
Trustees shall submit to the Minister a copy of the audited statement
of accounts, together with a copy of the report made by the auditors. 
No. 20 Environmental Management 2004 117
(4) As soon as practicable, after receipt of the copy of the
statement together with the copy of the report submitted pursuant to
subsection (3), the Minister shall lay a copy of the statement together
with a copy of the auditors' report before the National Assembly.
PART XIX
FINANCIAL PROVISIONS
217. The funds of the Council shall consist of-
(a) such amount as may be appropriated by Parliament;
(b) such sum as may be received by the Council by way of
donation, gift, grant, loan or bequest;
(c) any fees that may be charged and payable by the Council;
(d) any income generated by any project financed by the
Council, due allowance being made for any necessary
expenses which may be met by any such project; and
( e) any other lawful source of income.
218.-(1) The Council shall open and maintain an account or
accounts with commercial banks.
(2) All income and property as well as all revenues of the Council
acquired in accordance with section 217 shall be applied exclusively
to the fulfilment of the object of the Council.
219.-(1) The Board may, with approval of the Minister of Finance,
obtain loans or credit facilities from any institution for the purposes of
the Council upon such terms and conditions relating to repayment of
the principal and the payment of interests.
(2) The Board, if it is of the opinion that, the public interest
requires and, subject to approval of the Minister, secure the payment
of money by mortgage, charge or lien of its undertaking or property,
both present or future, or any part of it, and by issuance of debenture,
stock, bills, bonds and other means as the Board may deem fit or
guarantee the repayment of interest on a loan made to any person
engaged in the management of environment in Tanz.ania.
220. The Board may invest any part of the moneys available in any
account of the Council which is not for the time being required for the
purposes of the functions of the Council.
Sources
of funds
of the
Council
Banlc
account
and
appropriation of
funds
Powcrto
raise and
guarantee loans
Investments by
the
Council 
118 No. 20 Environmental Management 2004
Annual
and supplementary
budget
Accounts
and audit
ActNo.6
of2001
221.-(1) Not less than two months before the beginning of every
financial year the Board shall, at a meeting, pass a detailed budget in
this Act called the "Annual Budget" of the amounts respectively-
(a) expected to be received; and
(b) expected to be disbursed,
by the Council during that financial year and, whenever circumstances
so require, the Board may pass a supplementary budget in any financial
year.
(2) Where in any financial year the Council requires to make any
disbursement not provided for, or of an amount in excess of the
amount provided for in the annual budget for any year, the Board shall,
at a meeting, pass a supplementary budget detailing such disbursement.
222.-( 1) The Board shall cause to be provided and kept in accordance
with international accounting standards on an accruals basis, proper
books of accounts and records with respect to-
(a) the receipt and expenditure of moneys by, and other
fmancial transactions of the Council; and
(b) the assets and liabilities of the Council, and shall cause
to be made out for every financial year a balance sheet
showing the details of the income and expenditure of the
Council and its assets and liabilities.
(2) Within six months of the close of every financial year the
accounts including the balance sheet of the Council shall be audited
by the Controller and Auditor General in accordance with the provisions
of the Public Finance Act, 2001
(3) Every audited balance sheet shall be placed before a meeting
of the Board and, if adopted by the Board, be endorsed with a certificate
that it has been so adopted.
(4) As soon as the accounts of the Council have been audited, and
in any case not later than six months after the close of the financial
year, the Board shall submit to the Minister a copy of the audited statement
of accounts together with a copy of the report on that statement made
by the auditors.
Annual 223.-( 1) The Council shall cause to be prepared and submitted to
Report the Minister within six months after the close of each financial year an
annual report detailing generally activities and operations of the
Council during that year. 
No. 20 Environmental Management 2004 119
(2) The report shall be accompanied by:
(a) a copy of the audited accounts of the Council together
with the auditor's report on the accounts;
(b) a statement on implementation of all directions given by
the Minister to the Council during a year in question; and
such other infonnation as the Minister may direct.
(3) The Council shall also submit to the Minister such other
reports on its financial affairs as the Minister may by writing request.
( 4) The Minister shall, as soon as the report is submitted to him, lay
before the National Assembly the audited accounts of the Council
together with the auditor's report, if any, on the accounts and the
annual report of the Council.
PART XX
GENERAL AND TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS
224. Unless specifically provided otherwise, the provisions of this
Act, regulations and orders made under it shall bind the Government.
225. In addition to the system of criminal enforcement provided
for under this Act or any other written laws, the recourse to civil
enforcement shall continue to give individuals who are injured by a
violation of this Act a right to obtain compensation from the violator
through private civil suits.
226. In order to enforce environmental standards and duties, the
range of remedies available to a person injured or threatened to be
injured shall include-
(a) temporary or permanent injunctions;
(b) specific performance orders;
( c) fines and penalties;
(d) compensation;
(e) restoration orders, conservation orders, easement orders, and
(f) compliance orders;
(g) imprisonment; and
(h) any other remedy as the Tribunal or court may detennine
or any administrative measure as may be prescribed by
the Minister.
Act to
bind the
Government
Saving
over
recourseto civil
litigation
Range of
remedies
to the
injured 
.120 No. 20 Environmental Management 2004
Environ- 227.-(1) The Minister shall prescribe in the Regulations, activities
mental or processes which threaten the environment of which environmental :!orm- performance bond may be required.
bond (2) An environmental performance bond shall be deposited with
Right to
compensation
the -Director of Environment as . security for good environmental
practice until its refund to the depositor.
(3) The environmental performance bond shall be returned to the
operator of activity or process upon the satisfaction of the conditions
set by the Minister.
(4) The Director of Environment shall give the operator of an
activity or process an opportunity to be heard before confiscating the
environmental performance bond.
(5) An environmental performance bond shall be confiscated in
whole or in part when the Director of Environment finds an operator's
practices violate the provisions of this Act, including the conditions of
any certificate, licence or permit issued under this Act.
( 6) Where an environmental performance . bond is confiscated
under sub section (5), shall be used to rehabilitate a degraded
environment.
228.-(1) For the avoidance of doubt, the Minister shall
make regulations prescribing the right to compensation for those who
suffer damages while protecting the environment.
(2) Any person who violates environmental protection standards
causing any damage shall compensate for the damages and costs of
remedying the consequences.
Environ- 229.-(1) The Minister shall prepare guidelines for the management
mental of environmental emeigences including- emergency
preparedness
(a) major oil spills and gas leakages;
(b) spills of other hazardous substances;
( c) industrial accidents;
( d) natural and climate change related disaster such as
floods, cyclones, droughts and major pest infestations or
other instrusions of alien species of fauna and flora;
(e) influx of refugees, and
(f) fire. 
No. 20 Environmental Management 2004 121
(2) With a view to prepare an emergency preparedness plan
appropriate to the risk anticipated in any establishment, premises or
any area ofland, the Minister shall make consultation with the Disaster
Management Department, Government and private institutions,
relevant organization as well as individual persons.
230.-( 1) The Minister may make regulations for the puipose of Regulatgiving effect to the provisions of this Act. ions
(2) . Without prejudice to the generality of subsection (1),
regulations made under subsection (1) may-
(a) provide for the issue, amendment and revocation of any
licence issued under this Act;
(b) prescribe fees and levies to be charged under this Act;
( c) provide for the protection of any particular species of
fauna and flora;
(d) provide for the control or restriction of access to genetic
resources of Tanzania and provide for fees payable in
respect of accessing;
( e) provide procedure for import and export of genn plasm;
(f) provide for the control of the manufacture, importation,
exportation, collection, transportation, treatment, storage,
recycling, recovery or disposal of substances which may
be hazatdous to 1he envilooment and public health;
(g) · provide for the disposal of waste generally;
(h) provide for environmental impact assessment and specify
sizes of projects and activities specified in the Schedule
to the Act; (i) provide for the control of ozone depleting substances;
G) right to compensation for those who suffer damages
while protecting the environment;
(k) prescribe procedure and the manner for preparation,
adoption and implementation of environmental action plan;
(1) provide for sustainable management of protected wetlands;
(m) provide for the protection and for integrated management
of coastal zone; (n) provide for in-situ and ex-situ biodiversity conservation;
(o) provide for biosafety procedure and measures;
(p) provide for management of persistent organic pollutants;
(q) provide for conducting of environmental audit;
(r) provide for the carrying out of a strategic environment
assesment; and 
122 No. 20 Environmental Management 2004
Repeal
and
savings
Act No.
19 of
1983
Inconsistency
with
other
legislation
Act to be
translated into
Kiswahili
(s) prescribe anything required or pennitted to be prescribed
under this Act.
231.-(1) The National Environment Management Act, 1983 is
hereby repealed. ..
(2) Notwithstanding the repeal of the National Environment
Management Act, 1983, appointments, orders, notices, or anything
given or made under the repealed Act shall be deemed to have been
made under this Act and shall remain in force and effect until such
appointments, orders, notices or anything given or made is cancelled,
revoked, rescinded or otherwise withdrawn by an instrument or order
made under or in pursuance to the provisions of this Act.
(3) Without prejudice to the provisions of subsections (1) and (2),
appointment of the Director General, members of the Board of the
National Environmental Management Council shall stand made and all
employments or contracts of service made with respect to the
performance of the functions or the exercise of the powers conferred
on the Council before the commencement of this Act, shall be treated
as if they were made, perfonned or exercised pursuant to the provisions of
this Act.
(4) Nothing in this section shall operate so as to prevent an employee
or appointee from resigning or being tenninated.
232. Where the provision of this Act is in conflict or is otherwise
inconsistent with a provision of any other written law relating to
environmental management, the provisions of this Act shall prevail to
the extent of such inconsistency.
233. The Minister shall, as soon as may be practicable after the
enactment of this Act, cause this Act to be translated into Kiswahili
and that translation shall be published in the Gazette circulated to the
general public and in any other manner and fonns · as will enable the
citizens of Tanzania to gain access to that translation. 
No. 20 Environmental Management 2004 123
SCHEDULES
FIRST SCHEDULE
(Made under section 11 (3) )
COMPOSITION, MEETING AND PROCEDURE OF nm NATIONAL ENVIRONMENTAL
AOVISORY COMMITIEE
1. The National Environmental Advisory Committee shall consist of-
(a) the Permanent Secretary of the Ministry responsible for environment who
shall be the Chairman;
(b) the Director ofEnvironment who shall be the Secretary;
(c) the Commissioner for Minerals;
(d) the Director of Forestry;
(e) the Director of Wildlife;
(t) the Director of Water Resources;
(g) the Director of Crop Production;
(h) the Commissioner for Energy;
(i) the Director of Human Settlements;
(j) the Director ofRoads;
(k) the Director of Local Government;
(1) the Director oflndustries;
(m) the Director of Veterinary Services;
(n) the Director of Disaster Management;
(o) the Commissioner for Lands;
(p) the Director of Fisheries;
( q) the Director of Animal Production;
(r) a representative of the Attorney General;
(s) a representative from the Ministry respensible for community development,
(t) the Director General ofNEMC;
(u) the Director of Preventive Services from the Ministry of Health;
(v) Chief Government Chemist;
(w) a representative from the higher learning institutions;
(x) a representative from civil societies organisations; and
(y) a representative of private sector institutions.
2. At its first meeting members of the Committee shall elect amongst their
number a Vice Chairman.
3. Members of the Committee, other than those appointed by virtue of their
offices, shall hold office for three years and, unless their membership is
otherwise terminated due to misconduct or non attendance witoout excuse three successive
meetings of the Committee, shall be eligible to reappointment for one further term.
Composition of
NEAC
ViceChairman
Tenure
of office 
124 No. 20 Environmental Management 2004
Meetings
and
power
to convene
meetings
Invited
persons
Quorum
Subcommittee
Conflict
of interest
Committee to
regulate
its proceedings
Reports
of activities of
Committee
4.-(1) The National Environmental Advisory Committee shall meet at times and
places as the Chairman may, after consultation with the Secretary, determine.
(2) An ordinary meeting of the Committee shall be convened-by the Chairman
and the notice specifying the place, date, and time of, and agenda for, the meeting shall
be sent to each member at his .usual place of_business or residence not less than
fourteen days before the date of the meeting.
(3) The Chairman, or in his absence, a member elected to act as chairman, shall
convene a special meeting of the Committee in writing signed by not less than three
members of the Committee and, where such special meeting in convened, the agenda
for such meeting shall be circulated to each member at his usual place of business or
residence at least not less than three days before the date of the meeting.
(4)A meeting of the committee shall be presided over by the Chairman or in his
absence, by a member elected by those members present at that meeting.
S. Without prejudice to paragraph 1, the Chairman of the National Enviornmental
Advisory Committee may invite any person who is likely to render assistance in the
deliberations of the Committee.
6. The quorum at any meeting of the Committee shall be half of the members.
7.-(1) The Committee may establish such sub-Committees as it sees fit to enable
it to discharge its functions.
(2) The Committee and any Sub-Committees established by the Committee shall ·
have the power to co-opt any person to the committee or sub-Committee either
generally or for a specific item of business and such co-opted person shall have all the
rights and duties of a member of the Committee or sub-Committee except that such
co-opted person shall not have any right to vote on any matter before the committee
or sub-committee.
8. A member who has any interest, direct or indirect in any matter coming before
the Committee or sub-Committee shall, as soon as is reasonably practicable, disclose
the nature of that interest to the Chairman or Vice-chairman and shall not, thereafter
take part in any decision on that matter nor, except with the consent of a majority of
the members present at that meeting, take part in any deliberations of that meeting.
9. Subject to the provisions of this Schedule, the Committee shall regulate its
own proceedings.
10. The Committee shall prepare an annual report setting out its current
activities and indicating its future activities. 
No. 20 Environmental Management ·2004 125
SECOND SCHEDULE
(Made under section 20 (2))
PROCEDURE FOR nm CONDUCT OF BUSINESS BY nm BOARD
1, The Members shall elect one of their number to be the Vice-Chairman of the
Council and shall, subject to his continuing to be a member hold office for a term of
one year from the date of election, and shall be eligible for re-election.
2.-(1) A member shall, unless his appointment is sooner terminated by the
President or as the case may be, by the Minister or he ceases in any other way to be a
member, hold office for the period specified by the President in the case of the
Chairman or by the Minister, in the case of any other member, in the instrument of his
appointment or ifno period is so specified, for a period of three years from the date of
his appointment and shall be eligible for re-appointment.
(2) Any member appointed under paragraph l(a), or (c) may at any time resign
from his office by giving notice in wring to the President or, as the case may be, to the
Minister, and from the date specified in the notice or, if no date is so specified, from
the date of the receipt of the notice by the President or the Minister, he shall cease to
be a member.
(3) If a member of the Council who is a member by virtue of his holding some
other office is unable for any reason to attend any meeting he may nominate in writing
another person from his Ministry or organisation to attend that meeting in his place.
3, The appointment of a member of the Board may be terminated by the
appointing authority where the member -
(a) is adjudged bankrupt or enters into a composition or scheme of arrangement
with his creditors;
(b) is convicted of an offence and sentenced to imprisonment for a term of six
months without option of fine;
(c) is incapacitated by prolonged physical or mental illness from performing his
duties as a member of the Board; or
(d) becomes, for any reason, incapable or incompetent of properly performing
the functions of the office of a member.
4. Where a member dies or resigns or otherwise vacates office before the expiry
of the term of office, the appointing authority shall appoint another person in place of
such a member who shall hold office for remainder of the term of office of his
predecessor.
ViceChairman
Tenure
of
appointment
Termination and
cessation
of
membership
Alternate
members 
126 No. 20 Environmental Management 2004
Presiding
of meeting
Meeting
and procedure
of the
Council
Quorum
Decision
ofthe
Council
Records
and minutes
~-(1) The Chairman shall preside at all meetings of the Council.
(2) Where at any meeting of the Council, the Chainnan is absent the ViceChainnan shall preside.
(3) In the absence of both the Chairman and the Vicc-Chainnan at any meeting
of the Council, the members present shall, from amongst their number elect
a temporary Chainnan who shall preside at the meeting.
(4) The Chainnail or a person presiding at the meeting of the Council, shall in the
event of an equality of votes have a casting vote in addition to his deliberative vote.
6.-(1) Subject to sub-paragraph (2), the Council shall ordinarily meet three
times during every year for the transaction of its business.
(2) The Council may hold an extra-ordinary meeting if requested in writing by
half of the members or at any other time where exigency so require.
(3) The Chairman or, in his absence from the United Republic, the Vice-Chairman
may, and upon application in writing by at least five members convene a special
meeting of the Council at any time.
(4) The Secretary of the Council shall give to each member adequate notice of the
time and place of each meeting.
(5) The Council may invite any person who is not a member to participate in the
deliberation of any meeting of the Council, but any person so invited shall not be
entitled to vote.
7. At any meeting of the Council not less than one half of the members in office
for the time being shall constitute a quorum.
8.-(1) Subject to the provisions relating to a casting vote, all questions relating to
a casting vote, all question at a meeting of the Council shall be determined by
majority of the votes of the members present.
(2) Notwithstanding the provisions of sub-paragraph ( 1 ), a decision may be made
by the Council without meeting by circulation of the relevant papers among the
members, and the expression in writing of the views of the majority of the members.
9.-(1) The Council shall cause to be recorded and kept minutes of all business
conducted or transacted at its meeting and the minutes of each meeting of the Council
shall be read and confirmed or amended and confinned, at the next meeting of the
Council and signed by the person presiding at the meeting.
(2) Any minutes purporting to be signed by the person presiding at a meeting of
the Council shall, in the absence of proof or error, be deemed to be a correct record of
the meeting, whose minutes they purport to be. 
No. 20 Environmental Management 2004 127
10. The validity of any act or proceeding of the Council shall not be affected by
any vacancy among its members or by any defect in the.appointment of any of them.
11. All orders, directions, notices or other documents issued or on behalf of the
Council shall be signed by-
( a) the Chairman; or
(b) the Secretary or any officer or officers of the Council authorised in writing
in that behalf by the Secretary.
12. The Seal of the Council shall not be affixed to any instrument except in the
presence of the Chairman or the Secretary or some other officer of the Council and at
least one member of the Council.
13, Subject to the provisions of this Schedule, the Council may regulate its own
proceedings.
THIRD SCHEDULE
( Made under section 81 (1)
TYPE OF PROJECTS WHICH REQUIRE EIA
1. Oeneral-
(a) any activity out of character with its surrounding;
(b) any structure of a scale not in keeping with its surrounding; and
(c) major changes in land use.
2, Urban Development.
3. Transportation.
4. Dams, rivers and water resources.
S, Aerial spraying.
6. Mining, including quarrying and open-cast extraction.
7. Forestry related activities.
Vacancie
s, etc,
not to
invalidate proceedings
Orders
directions
Seal of
the
Council
Council
may regulate its
proceedings 
128 No. 20 Environmental Management 2004
Composition of
Board of
Trustees
8, Agriculture including animal production.
9. Processing and manufacturing industries.
10, Electrical infrastructure.
U. Management of hydrocarbons including the storage of natural gas
and combustible or explosive fuels.
12. Waste disposal.
13, Natural conservation areas.
14, Nuclear Reactors.
1S. Major development in biotechnology including the introduction and testing of
genetically modified organisms.
16. Any other activity as may be prescribed in the regulations.
FOURTH SCHEDULE
(Made under section 21$)
COMPOSITION AND PROCEEDINGS.OF nm BoARD OF
TRUSTEES OF nm FUND
1.-(1) Members of the Board of Trustees shall, subject to the provisions
of sub-paragraph (2), consist of members whose number shall not be less than seven
and not more than nine being •
(a) a Chairman who shall be a person of proven quality and integrity who has
achieved high office or distinction in Tanzania on public administration
who shall be appointed by President;
(b) a senior representative of the Ministry responsible for finance;
(c) a senior representative of the Ministry responsible for environment,
(d) a member from institutions concerned with training in environmental
management;
(e) a registered accountant;
(t) a legally qualified person from the Office of the Attorney-General;
(g) a member from Non-Governmental Organizations concerned with the
environmental management;
(h) a representative of the Minis1Jy responsible for local government authorities; and
(i) a representative of environmental management research institutions.
(2) Not less than three of the members shall be women. 
No. 20 Environmental Management 2004 129
2. The Trustees shall elect from amongst their number a Vice-Chairman who shall
hold office for two years but shall be, subject to remaining a Trustee eligible to
be re-elected for one further term of two years.
3. The Trustees shall hold office for three years and exoept where their membership is
terminated for misconduct or other sufficient reason, shall be eligible to be re-appointed for
one further term.
4, An officer responsible for financial matters of the Fund shall attend the
meeting of the Trustees as an ex-official member when matters connected with the
management of the Fund are discussed.
S.-(1) Subject to the provisions of sub-paragraph (2), an ordinary meeting of the
Trustees shall be convened by the Chairman and the notice specifying the date, time,
agenda and place for the meeting together with the necessary papers for the meeting
shall be sent to each Trustee at his usual place of business or residence not less than
fourteen days before the date of the meeting.
(2) The Chairman, or in his absence the Vice-Chairman or the Acting Chairman
shall be bound to convene a special meeting of the Trustees upon receipt of a request
in writing in that behalf signed by not less than three Trustees.
ViceChairman
Tenure
of office
Attendance by
ExOfficials
Convening
meetings
6. The quorum at any meeting of the Trustees shall be half of members in office Quorum
7. A Trustee who has an interest, direct or indirect in any matter coming before
the Board of Trustee shall, as soon as is reasonably practicable, disclose the nature of
that interest to the Chairman, or Vice-Chairman or the Acting Chairman and shall not,
thereafter, take part in any deliberations or decision on that matter.
8, Subject to the provisions of this Schedule, the Trustees may regulate their own
procoedinas.
Passed in the National Assembly on the 11th November, 2004 .
............ ~ ... ~ ..................... . Clerk of the National Assembly
Conflict
of
Interest
Board to
regulate
its
proceedings 