The Laws of Zambia
Copyright Ministry of Legal Affairs, Government of the Republic of Zambia
REPUBLIC OF ZAMBIA
THE ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AND
POLLUTION CONTROL ACT
CHAPTER 204 OF THE LAWS OF ZAMBIA
CHAPTER 204 THE ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AND POLLUTION CONTROL
ACT
THE ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AND
POLLUTION CONTROL ACT
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS
PART I
PRELIMINARY
Section
 1. Short title
 2. Interpretation
PART II
THE ENVIRONMENTAL COUNCIL
The Laws of Zambia
Copyright Ministry of Legal Affairs, Government of the Republic of Zambia
 3. Establishment of Environmental Council
 4. Composition of Council
 5. Tenure of Office and vacancies
 6. Functions of Council
 7. Proceedings of Council
 8. Seal of Council
 9. Committee of Council
10. Disclosure of interest
11. Immunity of members
12. Prohibition of publication and disclosure of information to unauthorised persons
13. Remuneration of member of Council
14. Funds of Council
15. Investment of funds
16. Financial year
17. Accounts
18. Annual report
PART III
ADMINISTRATION
19. Director and Deputy Director
20. Secretary and other staff
21. Standing Technical Advisory Committee
PART IV
WATER
The Laws of Zambia
Copyright Ministry of Legal Affairs, Government of the Republic of Zambia
Section
22. Interpretation
23. Responsibility of Council
24. Prohibition of water pollution
25. Duty to supply information to Inspectorate
26. Permission to discharge effluent into sewage system
27. Conditions for acceptance of effluent
28. Offences relating to effluent
29. Treatment of effluent
30. Licence to discharge effluent
31. Application for licence for new undertaking etc., likely to discharge effluent
32. Circumstances under which extension deemed new
33. Grant and refusal of licences
34. Contents of application and conditions of licence to be prescribed by
regulations
PART V
AIR
35. Interpretation
36. Responsibilities of Council
37. Controlled areas
38. Emission standards
39. Air pollution prohibited
40. Emergency situations
41. Information regarding emissions into ambient air
42. Licensing of emissions
43. Application for licence for new sources of emission
44. Circumstances under which extension deemed new
45. Grant or refusal of licences
46. Contents of application and conditions for licence
PART VI
WASTE
The Laws of Zambia
Copyright Ministry of Legal Affairs, Government of the Republic of Zambia
47. Interpretation
48. Control of local authorities
49. Responsibilities of Council
50. Prohibition against disposal of waste
51. Licences
52. Application for licence
53. Application for licence for existing disposal site or plant
54. Contents of application and conditions for licence
55. Cessation of activity relating to hazardous waste
56. Import, export and transportation of hazardous waste
PART VII
PESTICIDES AND TOXIC SUBSTANCES
57. Interpretation
58. Responsibilities of Council
59. Application for registration of new or reprocessed pesticide or toxic substance
60. Application for registration of pesticide or toxic substance in use before
commencement of Act
61. Information required for and period of registration
62. Registration
63. Contents of application and conditions for registration
64. Offences relating to pesticides and toxic substance
65. Seizure of pesticides and toxic substances
PART VIII
NOISE
66. Interpretation
67. Responsibilities of Council
68. Noise emission in excess of established standards prohibited
69. Exemptions
70. Publication of noise pollution control standards and guidelines
PART IX
IONISING RADIATION
The Laws of Zambia
Copyright Ministry of Legal Affairs, Government of the Republic of Zambia
71. Interpretation
72. Responsibilities of Council
73. Powers of inspectors relating to ionising radiation
74. Offences relating to ionising radiation
PART X
NATURAL RESOURCES CONSERVATION
75. Interpretation
76. Responsibilities of Council
77. Rehabilitation works
78. Powers of inspectors relating to natural resources
79. Repeal of certain parts of Cap. 156; of the old edition
80. Savings
PART XI
INSPECTORATE
81. Establishment of Inspectorate
82. Delegation of duties to Inspectorate
83. Appointment of inspectors
84. Powers of inspectors
85. Obstruction of inspectors
PART XII
GENERAL
The Laws of Zambia
Copyright Ministry of Legal Affairs, Government of the Republic of Zambia
86. Duty to report pollution
87. Secrecy
88. Renewal of licence
89. Inspector may request application for licence
90. Pollutor obligations
91. Offences and penalties
92. Application for licences to be made to Inspectorate or local authority
93. Grant of licence or permit subject to public representation
94. Cessation of licences
95. Appeals
96. Regulations
CHAPTER 204
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AND POLLUTION CONTROL
An Act to provide for the protection of the environment and the control of pollution;
to establish the Environmental Council and to prescribe the functions and
powers of the Council; and to provide for matters connected with or incidental
to the foregoing.
[23rd July, 1990]
No
12 of 1990
13 of 1994
PART I
PRELIMINARY
1. This Act may be cited as the Environmental Protection and Pollution Control Act. Short title
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires- Interpretation
"abatement" means the reduction or removal of environmental pollution to
permitted or prescribed levels;
"Advisory Committee" means the Standing Technical Advisory Committee
constituted under section twenty-one;
"Chairman" means the Chairman of the Council, appointed under section four;
The Laws of Zambia
Copyright Ministry of Legal Affairs, Government of the Republic of Zambia
"committee" means a committee constituted by the Council under section nine;
"conservation" means the preservation of the natural resources and their protection
from misuse, fire or waste;
"contaminant" means a substance or physical agent, or a combination of
substances and physical agents that may contribute to or create a condition
of pollution;
"Council" means the Environmental Council established by section three;
"Deputy Director" means the Deputy Director of the Council, appointed under
section nineteen;
"Director" means the Director of the Council, appointed under section nineteen;
"ecological system" means a living functional system which contains all organisms
including man, their environments and the relationships that exist between
them;
"environment", except as otherwise defined in PART IX, means land, water, air and
other external influences and conditions which affect the development and
life of all organisms including man;
"Inspectorate" means the Environmental Inspectorate established under section
eighty-one;
"member" means a member of the Council;
"person" means an individual, partnership, corporation or association;
"pollution" means the presence in the environment of one or more contaminants in
such quantities and for such duration and under such conditions as may
cause discomfort to or endanger the health, safety and welfare of persons,
or which may cause injury or damage to plant or animal life or property, or
which may interfere unreasonably with the normal enjoyment of life or use
of property or conduct of business;
"pollutor" means a person who contributes to or creates a condition of pollution;
"Secretary" means the Secretary of the Council, appointed under section twenty;
"standards" means the limits of pollution prescribed under this Act and any
regulations made under this Act; and
The Laws of Zambia
Copyright Ministry of Legal Affairs, Government of the Republic of Zambia
"Vice-Chairman" means the Vice-Chairman of the Council appointed under section
four.
PART II
THE ENVIRONMENTAL COUNCIL
3. There is hereby established the Environmental Council which shall be a body
corporate with perpetual succession and a common seal, capable of suing and of being
sued in its corporate name, and with power, subject to this Act, to do all such acts and
things as a body corporate may lawfully do or perform.
Establishment of
Environmental Council
4. (1) The Council shall consist of the following members: Composition of
Council
(a) the Chairman and the Vice-Chairman who shall be appointed by the
Minister;
The Laws of Zambia
Copyright Ministry of Legal Affairs, Government of the Republic of Zambia
(b) a representative from each of the following ministries or organisations:
(i) the Ministry responsible for water, lands and natural resources;
(ii) the Ministry responsible for agriculture;
(iii) the Ministry responsible for commerce and industry;
(iv) the Ministry responsible for mines;
(v) the Ministry responsible for health;
(vi) the Ministry responsible for power, transport and
communications;
(vii) the Ministry responsible for labour, social development and
culture;
(viii) the Ministry responsible for general education, youth and sport;
(ix) the Ministry responsible for higher education science and
technology;
(x) the Ministry responsible for information;
(xi) the Ministry responsible for local administration;
(xii) the Ministry responsible for tourism;
(xiii) the Ministry responsible for legal affairs;
(xiv) the National Commission for Development Planning;
(xv) the National Council for Scientific Research;
(xvi) the University of Zambia;
(xvii) the Copperbelt University;
(xviii) the Industrial Development Company Limited;
(xix) the Zambia Consolidated Copper Mines Limited;
(xx) the Zambia National Farmers' Union;
(xxi) the Chamber of Commerce;
(xxii) the Zambia Association of Manufacturers;
(xxiii) the Zambia Bureau of Standards;
(xxiv) a non-governmental organisation concerned with the
conservation of nature designated by the Chairman; and
(xxv) two other persons in their personal capacities appointed by the
Minister.
(2) Where any member, except the Chairman, Vice-Chairman and a member
referred to in paragraph (xxv) of subsection (1) is unable to attend any meeting of the
Council his ministry or organisation as the case may be, may in writing nominate another
person to attend in his stead and such person shall be deemed to be a member for the
purpose of that meeting.
5. (1) The Chairman, Vice-Chairman and members referred to in paragraphs (xiv)
to (xxv) of subsection (1) of section four shall hold office for three years and shall be
eligible for re-appointment.
Tenure of office and
vacancies
The Laws of Zambia
Copyright Ministry of Legal Affairs, Government of the Republic of Zambia
(2) Any member referred to in paragraph (a) of subsection (1) of section four may
resign upon giving one month's notice in writing to the Minister and may be removed by
the Minister at any time.
(3) The members referred to in paragraph (b) of subsection (1) of section four may
resign upon giving one month's notice to the Ministry or authority which appointed him and
may be removed by the Ministry or authority which appointed him at any time.
(4) The office of a member shall become vacant-
(a) if he is declared to be of unsound mind;
(b) if he is an undischarged bankrupt;
(c) if he is detained, or his freedom of movement is restricted under any law in
force in Zambia for a period in excess of six months;
(d) if he is sentenced to a term of imprisonment for a period in excess of six
months;
(e) if he is convicted of an offence involving dishonesty;
(f) upon resignation or removal under subsection (2) and (3); or
(g) if he is absent without reasonable cause from three consecutive meetings
of the Council of which he had notice.
6. (1) Subject to the other provisions of this Act, the functions of the Council shall
be to do all such things as are necessary to protect the environment and control pollution,
so as to provide for the health and welfare of persons, animals, plants and the
environment.
Functions of Council
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of subsection (1), the Council may-
(a) advise the Government on the formulation of policies relating to good
management of natural resources and the environment;
(b) recommend measures aimed at controlling pollution resulting from industrial
processes or otherwise;
(c) advise on any aspect of conservation;
The Laws of Zambia
Copyright Ministry of Legal Affairs, Government of the Republic of Zambia
(d) advise on the need to conduct and promote research analysis, surveys,
studies, investigations and training, of personnel, in the field of
environmental conservation protection and pollution control;
(e) receive and review reports and make recommendations to the Government
on environmental matters;
(f) conduct studies and make recommendations on standards relating to the
improvement of the environment and the maintenance of a sound
ecological system;
(g) co-ordinate the activities of all Ministries and other bodies concerned with
the protection of the environment and control of pollution;
(h) advise on co-operation between national and international organisations on
environmental matters;
(i) advise on the need for, and embark upon, general educational programmes
for the purpose of creating an enlightened public opinion regarding the
environment and an awareness of an individual and the public on their role
in the protection and improvement of the environment;
(j) identify projects or types of projects, plans and policies for which
environmental impact assessment are necessary and undertake or request
others to undertake such assessments for consideration by the Council;
(k) consider and advise, on all major development projects at an initial stage
and for that purpose the Council may request information on the major
development projects;
(l) monitor trends in the use of natural resources and their impact on the
environment;
(m) identify, promote and advise on projects which further or are likely to further
conservation for sustainable development and the protection and
improvement of the environment;
(n) hold seminars, symposia and prepare studies on matters relating to
environmental and natural resources use and protection;
(o) request for information on projects proposed, planned or in progress by any
person anywhere in Zambia;
(p) request for information on the quantity, quality and management methods
of natural resources and environmental conditions from any individual or
organisation anywhere in Zambia;
The Laws of Zambia
Copyright Ministry of Legal Affairs, Government of the Republic of Zambia
(q) provide support for environmental conservation, protection and
improvement by way of grants or loans, the provision of accommodation,
equipment and the common use thereof;
(r) advise on the effects of any sociological or economic development on the
environment;
(s) publicise all relevant information on any aspect of the environment;
(t) carry out any other activities relating to the protection of the environment
and the control of pollution which are necessary or conducive to the better
performance of its functions under this Act.
(3) The Council may, subject to such terms and conditions as it considers fit,
delegate in writing any of its functions under this Act to the Director, any member, the
Inspectorate or the Secretary.
(4) The Minister may give to the Council such general or specific directions with
respect to the discharge of its functions as he may consider necessary and the Council
shall give effect to those directions.
7. (1) Subject to the other provisions of this Act, the Council may regulate its own
procedure.
Proceedings of
Council
(2) The Council shall meet for the transaction of business at least once in every
three months at such places and at such times as the Chairman may determine.
(3) Upon giving notice of not less than fourteen days, a meeting of the Council may
be called by the Chairman and shall be called if not less than seven members so request
in writing:
Provided that if the urgency of any particular matter does not permit the giving of
such notice a special meeting may be called upon giving a shorter notice.
(4) Half of the members shall form a quorum at a meeting of the Council.
(5) There shall preside at any meeting of the Council, the Chairman or in his
absence, the Vice-Chairman or in the absence of both the Chairman and the
Vice-Chairman, such member as the members present may elect for the purpose of that
meeting.
The Laws of Zambia
Copyright Ministry of Legal Affairs, Government of the Republic of Zambia
(6) A decision of the Council on any question shall be by a majority of the members
present and voting at the meeting and, in the event of an equality of votes, the person
presiding at the meeting shall have a casting vote in addition to his deliberative vote.
(7) The Council may invite any person, whose presence is in its opinion desirable, to
attend and participate in the deliberations of a meeting but that person shall have no vote.
(8) The validity of any proceedings, act or decision of the Council shall not be
affected by any vacancy in its membership or by any defect in the appointment of any
member or because any person not entitled to do so took part in the proceedings.
(9) The Council shall cause to be kept minutes of the proceedings of every meeting
of the Council and of every meeting of any committee constituted by the Council.
8. (1) The seal of the Council shall be such device as may be determined by the
Council and shall be kept by the Secretary.
Seal of Council
(2) The Council may use a wafer or rubber stamp in lieu of the seal.
(3) The affixing of the seal shall be authenticated by the Chairman or the
Vice-Chairman, and the Secretary or one other person authorised in that behalf by a
resolution of the Council.
(4) Any contract or instrument which, if entered into or executed by a person not
being a body corporate would not be required to be under seal, may be entered into or
executed without seal on behalf of the Council by the Director or any other person
authorised in that behalf by a resolution of the Council.
(5) Any document purporting to be a document under the seal of the Council or
issued on behalf of the Council shall be received in evidence and shall be deemed to be
so executed or issued, as the case may be, without further proof, unless the contrary is
proved.
9. (1) The Council may, for the purpose of performing its functions under this Act,
constitute any committee the Chairman of which shall be a member of the Council and
may delegate to that committee any of its functions.
Committee of Council
(2) The Council may appoint as members of a committee established under
subsection (1), persons who are or are not members of the Council and those persons
shall hold office for such period as the Council may determine.
The Laws of Zambia
Copyright Ministry of Legal Affairs, Government of the Republic of Zambia
(3) Subject to any specific or general directions of the Council, any committee
established under subsection (1) may regulate its own procedure.
10. (1) If any person is present at a meeting of the Council or a committee of the
Council at which any matter in which that person or his spouse is directly or indirectly
interested in a private capacity is the subject of consideration he shall, as soon as
practicable after the commencement of the meeting, disclose that interest and shall not,
unless the Council or committee otherwise directs, take part in any consideration or
discussion of, or vote on, any question touching that matter.
Disclosure of interest
(2) A disclosure of interest made under this section shall be recorded in the minutes
of the meeting at which it is made.
11. No action or other proceedings shall lie or be instituted against any member or
any member of a committee for, or in respect of, any act or thing done or omitted to be
done in good faith in the exercise or purported exercise of his functions under this Act.
Immunity of members
12. (1) No person shall, without the consent in writing given by or on behalf of the
Council, publish or disclose to any person, otherwise than in the course of his duties the
contents of any document, communication or information whatsoever, which relates to,
and which has come to his knowledge in the course of, his duties under this Act.
Prohibition of
publication or
disclosure of
information to
unauthorised persons
(2) Any person who knowingly contravenes the provisions of subsection (1) shall be
guilty of an offence and shall be liable, upon conviction, to a fine not exceeding seven
thousand five hundred penalty units or to imprisonment for a term not exceeding two
years, or to both.
(3) If any person having information which to his knowledge has been published or
disclosed in contravention of subsection (1) unlawfully publishes or communicates any
such information to any other person, he shall be liable, upon conviction, to a fine not
exceeding seven thousand five hundred penalty units or to imprisonment for a term not
exceeding two years or to both.
(As amended by Act No. 13 of 1994)
13. A member of the Council or Committee shall be paid such remuneration or
allowance as the Minister may determine.
Remuneration of
member of Council
14. (1) The funds of the Council shall consist of such moneys as may- Funds of Council
(a) be appropriated by Parliament for the purposes of the Council;
(b) be paid to the Council by way of fees, grants or donations; and
The Laws of Zambia
Copyright Ministry of Legal Affairs, Government of the Republic of Zambia
(c) otherwise vest in or accrue to the Council.
(2) The Council may-
(a) accept moneys by way of grants or donations from any source in Zambia
and, with the approval of the Minister, from any source outside Zambia;
(b) with the approval of the Minister, raise by way of loans or otherwise, such
moneys as it may require for the discharge of its functions;
(c) in accordance with regulations made under this Act, charge and collect fees
in respect of consultancy and other services provided by the Council and
the Standing Technical Advisory Committee; and
(d) charge and collect fees in respect of programmes, seminars and
environmental impact assessments conducted by the Council.
(3) There shall be paid from the funds of the Council-
(a) the salaries and allowances and loans to the staff of the Council;
(b) such reasonable travelling and subsistence allowances for members or
members of any committee of the Council when engaged on the business
of the Council and at such rates as the Minister may determine;
(c) grants or loans for the support of environmental conservation, protection
and improvement; and
(d) any other expenses incurred by the Council in the performance of its
functions.
15. The Council may invest in such manner as it considers fit any of its funds
which it does not immediately require for the performance of its functions.
Investment of funds
16. The financial year of the Council shall be the period of twelve months ending
on 31st December in each year.
Financial year
17. The Council shall cause to be kept proper books of account and other records
relating to its accounts.
Accounts
The Laws of Zambia
Copyright Ministry of Legal Affairs, Government of the Republic of Zambia
18. (1) As soon as practicable but not later than six months after the expiry of each
financial year, the Council shall submit to the Minister a report concerning its activities
during such financial year.
Annual report
(2) The report of the Council shall include information on the financial affairs of the
Council and there shall be appended to it-
(a) an audited balance sheet;
(b) an audited statement of income and expenditure; and
(c) such other information as the Minister may require.
(3) The Minister shall, not later than fourteen days after the sitting of the National
Assembly next after receipt of the report referred to in subsection (1), lay it before the
National Assembly.
PART III
ADMINISTRATION
19. (1) Subject to the approval of the Minister, the Council shall appoint on such
terms and conditions as it may determine, a Director who shall be the chief executive
officer of the Council and who, subject to the control of the Council, shall be responsible
for the overall management and administration of the Council.
Director and Deputy
Director
(2) Subject to the approval of the Minister, the Council may appoint a Deputy
Director who-
(a) shall assist the Director in the performance of his duties under the Act; and
(b) shall discharge the functions of the Director whenever the office of the
Director is vacant or the Director is absent or is for any other cause unable
to discharge the functions of his office.
(3) The Director or in his absence the Deputy-Director, shall attend meetings of the
Council and may attend meetings of any committee established by the Council and may
address the meetings, but shall not vote on any matter:
The Laws of Zambia
Copyright Ministry of Legal Affairs, Government of the Republic of Zambia
Provided that the person presiding at any such meeting, may for good cause, require
the Director or Deputy-Director as the case may be, to withdraw from the meeting.
(4) The provisions of sections ten and eleven shall apply with necessary
modifications to the Director and Deputy-Director.
20. (1) The Council shall appoint a Secretary on such terms and conditions as the
Council may determine.
Secretary and other
staff
(2) The Secretary shall be responsible for the administration of the day to day affairs
of the Council under the general supervision of the Director.
(3) The Council may appoint, on such terms and conditions as it may determine,
such other staff as it considers necessary for the performance of its functions under this
Act.
21. (1) The Council shall constitute a Standing Technical Advisory Committee
whose members shall be experts in fields relevant to the environment, pollution, pesticides
and toxic substances, noise, ionising radiation, hazardous wastes, and waste
management.
Standing Technical
Advisory Committee
(2) The members of the Advisory Committee shall be appointed, by the Council on
such terms and conditions as it may determine.
(3) The functions of the Advisory Committee shall be to advise the Council and any
Minister on-
(a) the formulation and periodic revision of standards and regulations for
pollution control relating to water, air, solid wastes, hazardous wastes,
pesticides and toxic substances, noise emission and ionising radiation;
(b) the methods and equipment to be used for the monitoring and control of
pollution in the environment, particularly water, air, solid wastes, hazardous
wastes, pesticides and toxic substances, noise and ionising radiation;
(c) sound natural resources conservation, including the creation of natural
resources preserves for the propagation and maintenance of stocks of all
indigenous species and their germ plasm;
(d) proper land use practices;
(e) methods and procedures of rehabilitation of derelict land; and
The Laws of Zambia
Copyright Ministry of Legal Affairs, Government of the Republic of Zambia
(f) any other matter referred to it by the Council.
PART IV
WATER
22. In this Part, unless the context otherwise requires- Interpretation
"aquatic environment" means all surface and ground waters, but does not include
water in installations and facilities for industrial effluent, sewage collection
and treatment;
"discharge" means spilling, leaking, pumping, pouring, emitting, emptying or
dumping;
"effluent" means waste water or other fluid of domestic, agricultural, trade or
industrial origin, treated or untreated, and discharged directly or indirectly
into the aquatic environment;
"licence" means a licence to discharge effluent issued under section thirty-one;
"pollutant" means any substance or energy, which if it enters or is discharged into
water may cause discomfort to, or endanger the health, safety and welfare
of persons, or may cause injury or damage to plant or animal life or
property, or which may interfere unreasonably with the normal enjoyment of
life or property or use of property or conduct of business, and those objects
or substances as may inadvertently obstruct or divert the natural flow of a
water course when discharged or dumped into it;
"sewage" means waste water generated by residential and commercial
establishments;
"sewage system" includes sewage treatment plants;
"waste water" means water which has been used for domestic, commercial,
agricultural, trading or industrial purposes and as a result of such uses may
cause water pollution when discharged into the aquatic environment;
"water pollution" means the introduction, directly or indirectly of pollutants into an
aquatic environment.
The Laws of Zambia
Copyright Ministry of Legal Affairs, Government of the Republic of Zambia
23. The Council shall-
(a) establish water quality and pollution control standards;
(b) determine conditions for the discharge of effluents into the aquatic
environment;
(c) formulate rules for the preservation of fishing areas, aquatic areas, drinking
water sources and reservoirs, recreational and other areas, where water
may need special protection;
(d) identify areas of research and initiate or sponsor research in the effects of
water pollution on the environment, human beings, flora and fauna;
(e) order or carry out investigations of actual or suspected water pollution
including the collection of data;
(f) take steps or authorise any works to be carried out which appear to be
necessary to prevent or abate water pollution from natural causes or from
abandoned works or undertakings;
(g) lay down the analytical methods by which water quality and pollution control
standards can be determined and establish or appoint laboratories for the
analytical services required by the Inspectorate;
(h) initiate and encourage international co-operation in the control of water
pollution, in particular with those neighbouring countries with which Zambia
shares river basins;
(i) collect, maintain and interpret data from industries and local authorities on
the pre-treatment, nature and levels of effluents;
(j) collect, maintain and interpret data on water quality and hydrology which is
relevant to the granting of licences under this Part;
(k) enforce rulings made under this Part; and
(l) do all such things as appear to be necessary for the monitoring and control
of water pollution.
Responsibilities of
Council
24. No person may discharge or apply any poisonous, toxic, erotoxic, obnoxious or
obstructing matter, radiation or other pollutant or permit any person to dump or discharge
such matter or pollutant into the aquatic environment in contravention of water pollution
control standards established by the Council under this Part.
Prohibition of water
pollution
25. (1) Owners or operators of irrigation schemes, sewage system, industrial
production plants, workshops or any other undertaking which may discharge effluent shall
submit to the Inspectorate such information about the quantity and quality of such effluent.
Duty to supply
information to
Inspectorate
(2) The inspectorate may require an owner or operator of irrigation schemes,
sewage system, industrial production plants, workshops or any other undertaking which
the Inspectorate has reasonable grounds to believe may cause or causes the discharge of
effluent into the aquatic environment to submit all information relating to the quantity and
quality of effluent as the Inspectorate may require.
(3) The Inspectorate may order an owner or operator referred to under this section,
at his expense, to instal such metering devices, and to have such samples taken and
analysed, and to keep such records, as the Inspectorate may require.
The Laws of Zambia
Copyright Ministry of Legal Affairs, Government of the Republic of Zambia
26. The owner or operator of a trade or industrial undertaking who wishes to
discharge into an existing sewage system effluent from his plant shall obtain written
permission to do so from the local authority operating or supervising the sewage system.
Permission to
discharge effluent into
sewage system
27. (1) The local authority operating or supervising a sewage system may impose
conditions under which any effluent can be accepted or may prescribe methods of
pre-treating the effluent prior to acceptance into the system.
Conditions for
acceptance of effluent
(2) A local authority may vary the conditions of acceptance of an industrial or trade
effluent, but a variation shall not be made unless the authority gives six months' notice.
28. Any person who discharges any effluent into a sewage system in contravention
of the conditions imposed by the local authority, shall be guilty of an offence.
Offence relating to
effluent
29. (1) An effluent may be mixed for treatment prior to discharge or for conveying to
a common point of discharge.
Treatment of effluent
(2) No person shall withdraw water from a water course or any other source for the
purpose of diluting any effluent to make it acceptable except under a licence issued by the
Inspectorate.
30. (1) No local authority operating a sewage system or owner or operator of any
industry or trade shall discharge effluent into the aquatic environment without a licence.
Licence to discharge
effluent
(2) The owner or operator of an undertaking discharging an effluent before the
commencement of this Act or whom the Inspectorate so requests shall apply for a licence
within twelve months after the commencement of this Act.
(3) The Inspectorate may grant a licence for the discharge of effluent under this
Part.
31. (1) Any person intending to erect, instal or develop a new industrial or trade
plant, an agricultural scheme or an undertaking likely to discharge effluent shall inform the
Inspectorate of his intention during the early planning stage.
Application for licence
for new undertaking
etc., likely to discharge
effluent
(2) The Inspectorate may, without undue delay after the receipt and consideration of
the information submitted under subsection (1), require any person referred to in that
subsection to apply for a licence.
The Laws of Zambia
Copyright Ministry of Legal Affairs, Government of the Republic of Zambia
(3) The application for a licence under this section shall be submitted to the
Inspectorate not less than six months prior to the commencement of the discharge of
effluent.
32. An extention of an existing industrial or trade plant, or agricultural scheme or
other undertaking shall be deemed to be new if the extension-
(a) will increase the effluent of the existing plant either in the quantity or
concentration of pollutants;
(b) will discharge its effluent into a different water course; or
(c) will introduce a new type of pollutant into the environment.
Circumstances under
which extension
deemed new
33. (1) The Inspectorate, may or may not grant a licence after considering the
details ofGrant or refusal of
licences
(a) the possible effects on the quality of an affected water course or other
source;
(b) the existing licences affecting the same water course or other source; and
(c) the water requirements of riparian residents, human settlements and
agricultural schemes which depend on the water course.
(2) If a licence is not granted, the notice of refusal shall state the reasons for the
refusal.
34. Regulations made under section ninety-six shall prescribe the contents of an
application and the conditions for a licence to discharge effluent.
Contents of application
and conditions of
licence
PART V
AIR
35. In this Part, unless the context otherwise requires- Interpretation
"air pollution" means a condition of the ambient air arising wholly or partly from the
presence of one or more pollutants in the air that endangers the health,
safety or welfare of persons or that interferes with the normal enjoyment of
life or property or that endangers animal life or that causes damage to plant
life or property;
The Laws of Zambia
Copyright Ministry of Legal Affairs, Government of the Republic of Zambia
"ambient air" means the atmosphere surrounding the earth, but does not include
the atmosphere within a structure or within any underground space;
"air quality" means the concentration, prescribed under this Part, of a pollutant in
the atmosphere at the point of measurement;
"emission standard" means the amount, specified under this Part, of pollutant
emitted from a specific source
"licence" means a licence to emit pollutants into the ambient air;
"operator" in relation to works, industry undertaking or business, means the person
having the control of the works, undertaking or business;
"pollutant" means any substance or energy which if it enters or is discharged into
the ambient air is likely to render the air offensive or harmful to human,
animal or plant life;
"stationary source" means any source of emission of one or more pollutants other
than a motor vehicle, ship, train, aircraft or other similar vehicle or
conveyance.
36. The Council shall-
(a) establish ambient air quality and emission standards and guidelines;
(b) on the advice of the Advisory Committee, specify the analytical methods for
monitoring air contaminants and establish laboratories for analytical
services needed by the Inspectorate;
(c) identify areas of research and initiate or sponsor research on the effects of
air pollutants on human beings, the environment, flora and fauna;
(d) order or carry out investigations of actual or suspected air pollution
including the collection of data;
(e) initiate and encourage international co-operation in matters of air pollution,
especially with neighbouring countries;
(f) order any industry or other source of air pollution to file such returns and
provide such information as the Council may require;
(g) enforce rulings made under this Part; and
(h) do all such things as appear necessary for the monitoring and control of air
pollution.
Responsibilities of
Council
37. (1) The Council may, with the approval of the Minister, declare by statutory
instrument any area to be a controlled area for the purposes of this Part.
Controlled areas
The Laws of Zambia
Copyright Ministry of Legal Affairs, Government of the Republic of Zambia
(2) The Council may, with the approval of the Minister and within a controlled area,
prescribe emission standards from industrial or business activities, from burning liquids or
solid fuels.
38. (1) When establishing or prescribing emission standards the Council shall
considerEmission standards
(a) the rate of emission, concentration and nature of the pollutants emitted; and
(b) the best practicable technology available in controlling pollutants during the
emission process.
(2) The emission standards prescribed by the Council under this Part shall be
published in the Gazette at least ninety days before the date upon which they shall come
into effect.
39. No person may emit any pollutants which cause air pollution in contravention of
emission standards established or prescribed by the Council under this Part.
Air pollution prohibited
40. (1) In the case of an emergency involving very hazardous pollutants, the
Inspectorate shall take and advise on appropriate measures to be taken for the protection
of persons and the environment.
Emergency situations
(2) No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings shall lie or be instituted for or in
respect of any act or thing done or omitted to be done in good faith by any inspector in the
exercise or purported exercise of his duties under this section.
41. The Inspectorate may request an owner or operator of an operation of which
the Inspectorate has reasonable grounds to believe results in the emission into the
ambient air of any air contaminant, to submit all information relating to those emissions as
the Inspectorate may require.
Information regarding
emissions into ambient
air
42. An owner or operator who before the commencement of this Act is emitting a
pollutant which is likely to cause air pollution or whom the inspectorate so requests, shall
apply for a licence within twelve months after the commencement of this Act.
Licensing of emissions
43. (1) A person who intends to erect or instal a new industrial plant or develop a
new industrial process which is likely to cause air pollution shall inform the Inspectorate
during the planning stages, and shall apply for a licence.
Application for licence
for new sources of
emission
The Laws of Zambia
Copyright Ministry of Legal Affairs, Government of the Republic of Zambia
(2) The application for a licence shall be submitted to the Inspectorate not less than
six months prior to the commencement of operations.
44. (1) A change or extension to an existing plant, undertaking or process shall be
considered new if the changeCircumstances under
which extension
deemed new
(a) increases the emission of the existing plant in quantity or concentration of
pollutants; or
(b) introduces a new type of pollutant into the ambient air.
(2) No owner or operator or individual who operates a motor vehicle, ship, train,
aircraft or other similar conveyance shall-
(a) operate in a manner that will cause air pollution in contravention of the
established emission standards;
(b) import any machinery, equipment, device or similar thing that will cause
emission into the ambient air in contravention of prescribed emission
standards.
45. (1) The Inspectorate may or may not grant a licence after considering the
details ofGrant or refusal of
licences
(a) the possible effects on the quality of ambient air of the area;
(b) the existing licences affecting the same air resource;
(c) the requirements of residents, human settlements and other industrial or
commercial activities; and
(d) the comments from the local authority and other concerned organisations.
(2) If a licence is not granted, the notice of refusal shall state the reasons for the
refusal.
46. Regulations made under section ninety-six shall prescribe the contents of an
application and the conditions for a licence issued under this Part.
Contents of application
and conditions for
licence
The Laws of Zambia
Copyright Ministry of Legal Affairs, Government of the Republic of Zambia
PART VI
WASTES
47. In this Part, unless the context otherwise requires- Interpretation
"collection" means the act of removing waste, or materials which have been
separated for the purpose of recycling, from a storage point;
"disposal" means the storing, handling, processing, treatment and utilisation and
final location of waste to avoid undesirable effects on the environment;
"hazardous waste" means waste which is poisonous, corrosive, irritant, explosive,
inflammable, toxic or harmful to man, animal, plant or the environment;
"licence" means a licence to operate a waste disposal site or plant issued under
this Part;
"management" means a person who is, directly or through an agent, involved in
waste management;
"disposal site" means the land or water area on which waste disposal facilities are
physically located;
"waste" means garbage, refuse, sludges and other discarded substances resulting
from industrial and commercial operations and from domestic and
community activities but does not include waste water as defined in Part IV;
and
"storage" means the interim containment of waste after generation and prior to
collection for ultimate recovery or disposal.
48. The Council shall give specific or general directions to District Councils
regarding their function relating to the collection and disposal of waste operations under
the Local Government Act.
Control of local
authorities'
Cap. 281
The Laws of Zambia
Copyright Ministry of Legal Affairs, Government of the Republic of Zambia
49. The Council shall-
(a) formulate and provide standards on the classification and analysis of
wastes and formulate and advise on standard disposal methods and
means;
(b) regulate the handling, storage, transportation, segregation and destruction
of any hazardous waste;
(c) control the export and generation of hazardous waste;
(d) provide for the monitoring and regulation of any waste disposal sites;
(e) publicise the correct means of storage, collection and disposal of any class
of wastes;
(f) monitor the contamination and degradation of the environment arising from
the operation of any disposal site;
(g) monitor the safety and health of workers at disposal sites;
(h) provide for members of the public to make representations to the Council
on any matter arising from this Part where the matter may have an
influence on the health or aesthetic value of their surroundings;
(i) initiate and undertake research into problems relating to the collection,
storage, transportation and disposal of any class of waste;
(j) maintain statistical data on the nature, quantity and volume of waste
generated, and on sites and waste processing where waste disposal is
taking or has taken place;
(k) provide technical and advisory services to waste operators;
(l) enforce rulings made under this Part; and
(m) do all such things as appear to be reasonably necessary for the monitoring
and control of waste.
Responsibilities of
Council
50. (1) No person shall discharge waste so as to cause pollution in the
environment.
Prohibition against
disposal of waste
(2) No person shall transport waste to any site other than-
(a) in accordance with a licence;
(b) to a disposal site established in accordance with a licence.
(3) No person shall operate a waste disposal site or plant or generate hazardous
waste without a licence.
51. (1) The Inspectorate may, on application, grant a licence to generate hazardous
waste or to operate a waste disposal site or plant subject to such conditions, if any, as it
may impose.
Licences
The Laws of Zambia
Copyright Ministry of Legal Affairs, Government of the Republic of Zambia
(2) If a licence is not granted the notice of refusal shall state the reasons.
52. (1) Any person intending to operate a waste disposal site or plant or generate
hazardous waste or whom the Inspectorate so requests shall apply in writing to the
Inspectorate for a licence.
Application for licence
(2) An application for a licence to operate a waste disposal site shall only be granted
where the applicant has obtained approval of the town and country planning authority.
53. Any person who owns or operates a waste disposal site or plant or generates
hazardous wastes before the commencement of this Act shall apply for a licence within six
months after the commencement of this Act.
Application for licence
for existing disposal
site or plant
54. The Council shall by an order made by a court immediately stop any hazardous
waste generation, handling, transportation, storage and disposal activity which presents
an imminent and substantial danger to health and the environment.
Cessation of activity
relating to hazardous
waste
55. Regulations made under section ninety-six shall prescribe the contents of an
application and the conditions for a licence issued under this Part.
Contents of application
and conditions for
licence
56. (1) No person shall import any hazardous waste into Zambia. Import, export and
transportation of
hazardous waste
(2) No hazardous waste shall be exported to any country without a permit from the
Council and the consent of the receiving country.
(3) No hazardous waste shall be transported within or through Zambia without a
permit from the Council.
PART VII
PESTICIDES AND TOXIC SUBSTANCES
57. In this Part, unless the context otherwise requires- Interpretation
"container" means a package, can, bottle, bag, barrel, drum, tank or other
container, excluding spray applicator tanks, used to enclose a pesticide or
toxic substance;
The Laws of Zambia
Copyright Ministry of Legal Affairs, Government of the Republic of Zambia
"label" means any legend, word, mark, symbol or design applied or attached to,
included in, belonging to, or accompanying, any pesticides or toxic
substances;
"manufacturer" means an establishment engaged in the mechanical or chemical
transformation of materials or substances into new products, as pesticides
and toxic substances;
"package" means a container, wrapping, covering or holder in which a pesticide or
toxic substance is wholly or partly packed;
"pesticide" means a substance or mixture of substances or organism intended for
controlling, destroying, repelling or mitigating any pest, and a substance or
mixture of substances intended for use as a plant regulator, defoliant or
desfoliant;
"sale" includes offering, advertising and exposing, for sale a pesticide, or toxic
substance;
"toxic substance" means a poisonous substance which causes any adverse
physiological effects to man, animal, plant or the environment;
"trade name" means the registered name of the manufactured pesticide or toxic
substance; and
"use" means any act of handling or release of a pesticide or the exposure of
human beings and animals or the environment to a pesticide.
The Laws of Zambia
Copyright Ministry of Legal Affairs, Government of the Republic of Zambia
58. The Council shall-
(a) control the importation, exportation, manufacture, storage, distribution, sale,
use, packing, transportation, disposal and advertisement of pesticides and
toxic substances;
(b) regulate the registration of pesticides and toxic substances;
(c) provide for the proper labelling and packaging of pesticides and toxic
substances;
(d) review the use and efficacy of pesticides and toxic substances;
(e) provide for the monitoring, in the environment, of pesticides, and toxic
substances and their residues;
(f) establish or prescribe laboratories which shall operate as standard
laboratories for pesticides and toxic substances;
(g) establish and enforce procedures and regulations for the storage of
packages and containers of pesticides or toxic substances;
(h) collect data from industry on the production, use and health effects of
pesticides and toxic substances;
(i) keep records and reports necessary for the administration of this Part; and
(j) do all such things as appear necessary for the monitoring and control of
pesticides and toxic substances.
Responsibilities of
Council
59. (1) A person who intends to manufacture, import or process a new pesticide or
toxic substance or who intends to reprocess an existing pesticide or toxic substance for a
significantly new use, must apply for registration of the pesticide or toxic substance and
give the Inspectorate ninety days notice in writing before importing, manufacturing,
processing or reprocessing such pesticide or toxic substance.
Application for
registration of new or
reprocessed pesticide
or toxic substance
(2) The application referred to in subsection (1) shall include the name of the trade
mark of the pesticide or toxic substance, the chemical identity, molecular structure,
proposed categories of use, an estimate of the amount, by-products, processing and
disposal of the pesticide or toxic substance, and any test data related to health and
environmental effects.
60. (1) A person who has manufactured, imported or processed a pesticide or toxic
substance in use before the commencement of this Act or whom the Inspectorate so
requires shall apply for registration within six months after the commencement of this Act.
Application for
registration of
pesticide or toxic
substance in use
before
commencement of Act
(2) Applications for registration shall be accompanied by all relevant data to enable
the Inspectorate assess the suitability and efficacy of the pesticide or toxic substance.
61. (1) The Inspectorate shall publish guidelines for pesticides and toxic
substances specifying the information and data which will be required to support
registration.
Information required
for, and period of
registration
The Laws of Zambia
Copyright Ministry of Legal Affairs, Government of the Republic of Zambia
(2) A pesticide or toxic substance shall be registered for three years, unless some
other period is specified by the Inspectorate and may be renewed for a like period.
62. (1) The Inspectorate may on application register a pesticide or toxic substance
subject to such conditions as it may determine.
Registration
(2) Where the Inspectorate refuses to register any pesticide or toxic substance the
notice of refusal shall state the reasons.
63. Regulations made under section ninety-six shall prescribe the contents of an
application and the conditions for registration of pesticides and toxic substances under
this Part.
Contents of application
and conditions for
registration
64. (1) No person shall- Offences relating to
pesticides and toxic
substances
(a) detach, alter, or destroy labelling as prescribed under this Part, of a
pesticide or toxic substance;
(b) change the composition of a pesticide or toxic substance contrary to the
provisions of this Part; or
(c) use or dispose into the environment a pesticide, or toxic substance in
contravention of this Part.
(2) No person shall distribute, sell, offer for sale, hold for sale, import, deliver for
importation to, or receive from, deliver or offer to deliver, to any other person any
unregistered pesticide or toxic substance.
(3) Any person who contravenes any of the provisions of this section shall be guilty
of an offence and shall be liable upon conviction to a fine not exceeding thirty thousand
penalty units or imprisonment for a period not exceeding five years.
(As amended by Act No. 13 of 1994)
65. (1) Any pesticide or toxic substance which an Inspector reasonably suspects to
be the subject matter of an offence under this Part shall be liable to seizure.
Seizure of pesticides
and toxic substances
(2) Whenever any pesticide or toxic substance is seized under subsection (1) an
Inspector shall serve a notice of seizure on the owner of the pesticide, or toxic substance
as soon as practicably possible.
The Laws of Zambia
Copyright Ministry of Legal Affairs, Government of the Republic of Zambia
(3) Where any pesticide or toxic substance is seized under this section the pesticide
or toxic substance shall be placed under the custody of such person or such authority as
the Inspector may determine.
(4) Any pesticide or toxic substance placed under custody shall be released if after
six months-
(a) no prosecution under this Part is instituted with regard to the pesticide or
toxic substance; or
(b) no person is convicted for an offence under this Part.
PART VIII
NOISE
66. In this Part, unless the context otherwise requires- Interpretation
"noise" means any undesirable sound, that is intrinsically objectionable or that can
cause adverse effects on human beings, animals or the environment;
"noise level" means the level of noise, measured in decibels or other suitable units;
and
"noise emission standards" means the noise level emission standards established
by the Council under section sixty-eight.
67. The Council shall-
(a) set up standard procedures for noise measurement;
(b) establish noise level and noise emission standards for construction sites,
plants, machinery, motor vehicles, aircraft including sonic booms, and for
industrial and commercial activities;
(c) apply appropriate measures to ensure the abatement and control of noise
from the sources referred to in paragraph (b);
(d) measure the level of noise emanating from the sources referred to in
paragraph (b), details of which measurement shall be given to the owner or
occupier of the premises from which the measurement was taken; and
(f) advise on noise pollution abatement measures.
Responsibilities of
Council
The Laws of Zambia
Copyright Ministry of Legal Affairs, Government of the Republic of Zambia
68. Subject to section sixty-nine, no person shall emit noise in excess of the noise
emission standards established under section sixty-seven.
Noise emission in
excess of established
standards prohibited
69. (1) Notwithstanding section sixty-eight, the Inspectorate may grant a permit in
writing allowing excessive emission of noise under such terms and conditions as it may
determine.
Exemption
(2) Where an exemption has been granted under subsection (1), workers exposed
to excessive levels of noise shall be adequately protected in accordance with the
directives of the Inspectorate.
70. The noise emission standards and guidelines as well as zones prescribed for
the purposes of this Part shall be published in the Gazette at least ninety days before the
date upon which they shall come into effect.
Publication of noise
pollution control
standards and
guidelines
PART IX
IONISING RADIATION
71. In this Part, unless the context otherwise requires- Interpretation
"emergency" means a sudden situation associated with an incident arising from the
exposure of the public or the environment to the harmful effects of ionising
radiation;
"environment" means the total terrestrial, atmospheric and aquatic environs but
does not include the area within the boundaries of prescribed installations
handling radioactive material or radiation sources;
"facility" means an assembly of devices, equipment, structures or natural features
whether simple or complex which serves some specific purpose or performs
some specific functions.
"ionising radiation" means any electro-magnetic or particle radiation capable of
producing ions, directly or indirectly, in its passage through matter;
"monitoring" means the measurement of radiation or radioactivity for the
assessment or control of exposure to radiation or radioactive material;
"natural background levels" means radiation levels due to cosmic rays and natural
radioactivity;
The Laws of Zambia
Copyright Ministry of Legal Affairs, Government of the Republic of Zambia
"nuclide" means a species of atom characterised by the constitution of its nucleus;
"radioactive material" means any material having a specific activity greater than
seventy becquerel per gram;
"radioactive contamination" means the deposition of radioactive material in any
place where it is not desired, particularly where its presence may be
harmful and the harm may be vitiating an experiment or procedure, or
where it actually may be a source of danger to the public;
"radio nuclide" means any radioactive nuclide.
72. Without prejudice to the Ionising Radiation Act the Council shall-
(a) establish standards for the proper regulation of radioactive contamination;
(b) inspect and examine any area, place or premises, or any vehicle, vessel,
boat, aircraft or any carriage of any description in or upon which the
Inspectorate has reasonable cause to believe that radioactive material or
any source of ionising radiation is stored, used, transported or disposed of;
(c) examine any person with respect to matters under this Part, where there is
reasonable cause to believe that that person is contaminated with
radioactive material or is unlawfully in possession of an ionising radiation
source;
(d) provide information, warn and protect the public, in case of actual or
potential public exposure to radioactive material or ionising radiation in the
environment;
(e) liaise with the Radiation Protection Board established by section five of the
Ionising Radiation Act or any other organisation dealing with radioactive
material;
(f) conduct an ionising radiation monitoring programme and advice on ionising
radiation control and protection measures;
(g) maintain records of releases of radioactive contaminants into the
environment and keep records of natural background levels of radiation in
the environment;
(h) request any outside authority to offer assistance required to help carry out
the duties of the Inspectorate; and
(i) do all such things as appear to be necessary for the monitoring and control
of pollution from radiation.
Responsibilities of
Council.
Cap. 311
Cap. 311
73. An inspector at any reasonable time may-
(a) enter, inspect and examine any place, area, premises, or any vehicle,
vessel, boat, aircraft or any carriage of any description in or on which he
has reasonable grounds to believe that radioactive material or any source
of ionising radiation is stored, used, transported or disposed of but no entry
shall be made into a private dwelling house except under the authority of a
court warrant;
Powers of inspectors
relating to ionising
radiation
The Laws of Zambia
Copyright Ministry of Legal Affairs, Government of the Republic of Zambia
(b) order presentation of-
(i) a licence authorising the possession or use of radioactive material
or sources of dangerous ionising radiation;
(ii) a licence authorising the mining and processing of radioactive ores;
or
(iii) a register, certificate, notice or document kept under the Ionising
Radiation Act;
(c) make enquiries from any person with respect to matters under this Part
where there is reasonable cause to believe that such person is
contaminated with radioactive material or is unlawfully in possession of an
ionising radiation source; and
(d) exercise such other powers as are necessary for the carrying out of this
Part.
Cap. 311
74. (1) A person who imports, processes, mines, exports, possesses, transports,
uses or disposes of radioactive material or other source of dangerous ionising radiation
without a licence issued under the Ionising Radiation Act, shall be guilty of an offence and
liable upon conviction to a fine not exceeding seventy five thousand penalty units or to
imprisonment for a period not exceeding seven years or to both.
Offences relating to
ionising radiation
Cap. 311
(2) In addition to the penalties provided in subsection (1), the radioactive material or
other source of dangerous ionising radiation shall be liable on the order of a court, to
seizure, impoundment, sealing, seizure of operation, destruction or disposal in such
manner as the court may consider necessary to protect the public and the environment
and may only be returned to the original owner on the order of the court and under the
conditions set out in a licence issued by the Ionising Radiation Protection Board
established by section five of the Ionising Radiation Act.
(As amended by Act No. 13 of 1994)
Cap. 311
PART X
NATURAL RESOURCES CONSERVATION
75. In this Part, unless the context otherwise requires- Interpretation
"derelict land" means land that is damaged by extractive or other industrial or
agricultural activities or that is unsightly and is incapable of reasonable
beneficial use;
"land use" includes an activity that has an impact on land, water, soil, air, fauna
and flora;
"natural resources" shall have the meaning assigned to it in the Natural Resources
Conservation Act; and
The Laws of Zambia
Copyright Ministry of Legal Affairs, Government of the Republic of Zambia
"rehabilitation" means the restoration of natural resources to their original state or
to a reasonable state acceptable to the Inspectorate.
76. The Council shall-
(a) conduct or sponsor research on land use practices and their impact on
natural resources, and such other studies which shall be the basis for better
conservation and protection of natural resources;
(b) establish and review land use guidelines;
(c) with the approval of the Minister, make regulations for the conservation and
protection of natural resources;
(d) monitor dereliction of land and where derelict land exists, assess the nature
of rehabilitation works required;
(e) monitor land contamination and where such contamination exists, assess
the nature of any rehabilitation works required;
(f) carry out campaigns to increase public awareness about natural resources
conservation;
(g) take stock of the nation's natural resources and their utilisation in liaison
with other relevant agencies and experts dealing with natural resources
conservation; and
(h) do all such other acts and things as are necessary to carry out the
purposes of this Part.
Responsibilities of
Council
77. (1) The Council may direct any person responsible for land dereliction or
contamination to carry out rehabilitation works, within a reasonable specified time, to the
satisfaction of the Inspectorate.
Rehabilitation works
(2) Where the Inspectorate believes that land contamination warrants immediate
correction, it may carry out rehabilitation works and may charge all or part of the costs of
those works to the person responsible for causing the dereliction or contamin-ation who
shall pay such costs within a specified reasonable time.
(3) (a) Any person who fails to comply with a directive made by the Inspectorate
under this section shall be guilty of an offence.
(b) A court, in addition to any other penalty which it may impose, may make an order
requiring that person to comply with the directive within a specified reasonable time.
The Laws of Zambia
Copyright Ministry of Legal Affairs, Government of the Republic of Zambia
78. An inspector may-
(a) make such inquiries and examinations as are necessary to ascertain
whether this Part is being complied with;
(b) carry out surveys and interviews which will assist in the proper
management and conservation of natural resources;
(c) inspect land uses to determine their impact on the quality and quantity of
natural resources; and
(d) publicise land use guidelines and natural resources conservation
regulations.
Powers of inspectors
relating to natural
resources
79. Subject to section eighty, Parts I, II, III and VIII of the Natural Resources
Conservation Act are hereby repealed.
Repeal of certain Parts
of Cap. 156 of old
edition
80. Notwithstanding section seventy-nine ministerial orders, conservation plans,
and regulations made by statutory instrument under the Parts I, II, III and VIII of the
Natural Resources Conservation Act shall remain in full force and effect until they are
amended, rescinded or replaced by orders, conservation plans, or regulations under this
Act.
Savings
PART XI
INSPECTORATE
81. The Council shall establish an Environmental Inspectorate with the necessary
technical staff and facilities required to administer, monitor and enforce measures for the
protection of the environment and the prevention of pollution in the environment.
Establishment of
Inspectorate
82. The Council may delegate all or any of the duties of the Inspectorate to a local
authority in such area as it may designate.
Delegation of duties to
Inspectorate
83. (1) In order to ensure compliance with the provisions of this Act the Council
shall appoint such number of inspectors as it may consider necessary.
Appointment of
inspectors
(2) Every inspector shall be provided with a certificate of appointment which shall be
prima-facie evidence of the inspector's appointment as such.
(3) An inspector shall, on demand by a person affected by the exercise of the
powers of the inspectors under this Act, produce for inspection the certificate referred to in
subsection (2).
The Laws of Zambia
Copyright Ministry of Legal Affairs, Government of the Republic of Zambia
84. (1) An inspector, at any reasonable time may enter any area, place or premises
that is or forms part of any industry, works, undertaking or business, in which he
reasonably believes there is being, or has been carried on an activity that may contribute
or has contributed to pollution, and examine and take samples or materials used in or
resulting from the activity carried on there and inspect any vehicle or other conveyance
but there shall be no entry into a private dwelling except with the consent of the occupant
or under the authority of a court warrant.
Powers of inspectors
(2) An inspector who enters an area, place or premises or inspects a vehicle under
subsection (1) may order the person in charge to produce for inspection or for the purpose
of obtaining copies or extracts, any books, documents or papers concerning any matter
relevant to the administration of this Act or regulations made for the purposes of this Act.
(3) The owner or person in charge of-
(a) any area, place, premises or vehicle referred to in subsection (1);
(b) any waste disposal site referred to in Part VI;
(c) the manufacture, distribution or use of pesticides or toxic substances
referred to in Part VII;
(d) any radioactive material or any source of dangerous ionising radiation, or a
radioactive ore mining or processing facility referred to in Part IX;
and any person found there shall give an inspector reasonable assistance, for the purpose
of examination, enquiry collection of samples or otherwise.
(4) An inspector may-
(a) inspect and examine any vehicle, railway carriage or other conveyance in or
upon which he had reasonable cause to believe that a pesticide, toxic
substance, hazardous waste or radioactive material, or other pollutant is
being or has been transported;
(b) order the production of any documents pertaining to the transportation of
any such substance;
(c) obtain any samples he considers necessary of any substance so
transported; or
(d) request information from any person who appears to have custody or
control of those substances so transported.
The Laws of Zambia
Copyright Ministry of Legal Affairs, Government of the Republic of Zambia
85. (1) A person shall be guilty of an offence if he- Obstruction of
Inspector
(a) wilfully delays or obstructs an inspector in the carrying out of his duties; or
(b) knowingly or negligently gives an inspector false or misleading information
orally, in writing or otherwise.
(2) Any person guilty of an offence under subsection (1) shall be liable upon
conviction to a fine not exceeding seven thousand five hundred penalty units or to
imprisonment for a term not exceeding six months or to both.
(As amended by Act No. 13 of 1994)
PART XII
GENERAL
86. (1) A person who inadvertently or accidentally causes or witnesses an act
causing pollution of any aspect of the environment shall without delay report to the
inspectorate, the police or to a local authority.
Duty to report pollution
(2) The police or local authority shall submit a report to the Inspectorate on any
report received under subsection (1) and take reasonable steps to protect the public.
(3) Any person who wilfully fails to make a report required under this section shall be
guilty of an offence and liable upon conviction to a fine not exceeding one thousand five
hundred penalty units or imprisonment for a period not exceeding six months or to both.
(As amended by Act No. 13 of 1994)
87. An inspector shall treat as confidential the source of any complaint bringing to
his notice any contravention of this Act and shall give no intimation to the owner of the
place inspected or his representative that a complaint was made, or any information that
might identify the complainant.
Secrecy
88. (1) The Inspectorate may renew any licence issued under this Act. Renewal of licence
(2) In renewing a licence, the Inspectorate shall consider whether the applicant has
complied with the provisions of the Act and any regulations made hereunder.
The Laws of Zambia
Copyright Ministry of Legal Affairs, Government of the Republic of Zambia
89. Where an inspector considers that an industry, works, undertaking, business or
any person is discharging, emitting, or disposing a contaminant or substance which may
cause pollution he may require the owner or operator to apply to the Inspectorate for a
licence to authorise that discharge, emission, or disposal.
Inspector may request
application for licence
90. (1) Where the Inspectorate establishes that pollution or despoliation is occurring
or has occurred, the Inspectorate shall inform the pollutor and order him to take
appropriate abatement and control measures specified by the Inspectorate under this Act.
Pollutor obligations
(2) Where the pollutor is unable or unwilling to take the abatement and control
measures required under subsection (1), the Council may take the measures and in such
case, the cost incurred by the Council, shall be paid by the pollutor.
91. (1) A person who pollutes the environment or contravenes any provision of this
Act for which no penalty is provided shall be guilty of an offence and liable upon conviction
to a fine not exceeding fifteen thousand penalty units or to imprisonment for a term not
exceeding three years or to both.
Offences and
penalties
(2) For a continuing violation, a court may order a daily fine not exceeding seven
thousand five hundred penalty units.
(3) Where an offence under this Act is committed by a body of persons-
(a) in the case of a body corporate, every director or similar officer of the body
shall be guilty of the offence; or
(b) in the case of a partnership, every partner shall be guilty of an offence.
(4) A person shall not be guilty of an offence under subsection (3), if he proves to
the satisfaction of the court that the act constituting the offence was done without his
knowledge, consent or connivance and that he did his part to prevent the commission of
the offence having regard to all the circumstances of the case.
(As amended by Act No. 13 of 1994)
92. (1) An application for a licence, registration or permit under this Act shall be
made to the Inspectorate or to a local authority to whom the Council has delegated power
under section eighty-three.
Applications for
licences to be made to
Inspectorate or local
authority
(2) Any application referred to in subsection (1) shall be made in such form and in
such manner as the Council may prescribe.
The Laws of Zambia
Copyright Ministry of Legal Affairs, Government of the Republic of Zambia
93. No licence or permit shall be issued under this act unless the Inspectorate has,
twenty-eight days before granting the licence or permit published its intention in the
Gazette inviting representation from any interested person affected by the grant of the
licence or permit.
Grant of licence permit
subject to public
representation
94. Where any licence granted under this Act is for a duration of five years or more
and after five years from the date of the issue of a licence such discharge, emission or
disposal authorised by the licence has not taken place or where such discharge, emission
or disposal has ceased for a period of three years, the licence shall cease to be in force.
Cessation of licences
95. (1) A person aggrieved with any decision or ruling made by an Inspectorate
under this Act, may appeal to the Council within forty-five days after the date of receipt of
the ruling or decision.
Appeals
(2) The Council within thirty days after the receiving an appeal, shall make and
convey its decision to the appellant.
96. The Minister in consultation with the Council, may, by statutory instrument
make regulations for anything which has to be prescribed under this Act, for the protection
of any aspect of the environment and for the control of pollution in the environment.
Regulations
SUBSIDIARY LEGISLATION
SECTIONS 58, 63 AND 96-THE PESTICIDES AND TOXIC SUBSTANCES REGULATIONS
Regulations by the Minister
Statutory Instrument
20 of 1994
Act No.
13 of 1994
PART I
PRELIMINARY
1. These Regulations may be cited as the Pesticides and Toxic Substances
Regulations.
Title
2. In these Regulations unless the context otherwise requires- Interpretation
"application" means the way and means of using the pesticide or toxic substance
on its intended target as prescribed by the manufacturer;
The Laws of Zambia
Copyright Ministry of Legal Affairs, Government of the Republic of Zambia
"banned pesticide or toxic substance" means a pesticide or toxic substance for
which all registered uses are prohibited or for which requests for registration
have not been granted;
"bunding" means an upraised area surrounding the floor of a warehouse to contain
any spillages and washings from pesticides or toxic substances and from
cleaning water of the pesticides and toxic substances;
"chemical treatment" means the reaction of a pesticide or toxic substance with
another under optimum conditions of pH, temperature and others;
"dangerous poison" shall mean highly hazardous in accordance with the World
Health Organisation Classification;
"disposal" means the final location of pesticides or toxic substances, their wastes
or contaminated packaging materials by burial, chemical or thermal
destruction;
"experimental pesticides or toxic substances" means a pesticide or toxic substance
to be assessed in Zambia for primary biological activity, and not available to
the public for sale or use;
"incineration" means the subjection of a pesticide or toxic substance to an
appropriate high temperature for a specified period of time to achieve
complete destruction;
"inspectorate" means the Environmental Inspectorate established under section
eighty-one of the Act;
"label" means the written, printed or graphic matter on, or attached to, the pesticide
and toxic substance or the immediate container thereof and the outside
container or wrapper of the retail package of the pesticide or toxic
substance;
"packaging" means the containers together with the protective wrapping used to
carry and or store pesticides and toxic substances or their products for
wholesale and retail distribution to users;
"packaging material" means the material which the container is made of;
"pesticide" means a substance or mixture of substances or organisms intended for
controlling, repelling or mitigating any pest, and substance or mixture of
substances intended for use as a plant regulator, defoliant or desfoliant;
"protective clothing" means any cloth, material or device designed to provide
protection from pesticides or toxic substance when they are handled or
applied;
The Laws of Zambia
Copyright Ministry of Legal Affairs, Government of the Republic of Zambia
"recognised research institution" means a research institution recognised by the
Minister as competent to carry out research into pesticide or toxic
substance use;
"repackaging" means the transfer of pesticide from any commercial package into
any other, usually smaller container, for subsequent sale;
"residue" means any substance in food, soil agricultural commodities or animal
feed resulting from the use of pesticides and toxic substances and includes
any derivatives or a pesticide or toxic substance considered to be of
toxicological significance;
"severely restricted" means a pesticide or toxic substance whose general
registered uses are prohibited but whose certain registered uses are
permitted under these regulations;
"toxic substance" means a poisonous substance which causes significant adverse
physiological effects to man, animal or the environment;
"toxicity" means a physiological or biological property which determines the
capacity of a substance to injure or harm living organism by being absorbed
in the body;
"trader" means any person engaged in the trade of pesticides or toxic substances
and includes any person exporting, importing, or selling small substances;
and
"withholding period" means the period between the last application for the product
and the harvest of plant products; grazing of treated areas and slaughter of
treated animals for food.
PART II
REGISTRATION
3. (1) A person intending to manufacture, import, export, improve, or process a new
pesticide or toxic substance shall apply for registration to the Inspectorate in Form PTS 1
of the First Schedule and shall pay the appropriate application fee set out in the Second
Schedule.
Application for
registration of
pesticide or toxic
substance
(2) The application referred to in sub-regulation (1) shall-
The Laws of Zambia
Copyright Ministry of Legal Affairs, Government of the Republic of Zambia
(a) indicate the categories of use of proposed pesticide or toxic substance;
(b) indicate the trade mark, chemical identity, molecular structure, an estimate
of the amounts, by-products, processing, disposal of the pesticide or toxic
substance and any test data relating to health and environmental effects;
and
(c) be accompanied by a copy of the approved label or a fascimile thereof.
(3) The application under this regulation shall be made at least ninety days before
importing, exporting, or the commencement of manufacturing, processing or reprocessing
activities, of the pesticide or toxic substance.
(4) A person who has manufactured, imported or processed a pesticide or toxic
substance in use before the commencement of these Regulations shall apply for
registration within thirty days from the commencement of these Regulations.
(5) The proprietory rights in the data and information referred to in paragraphs (3) of
sub-regulation (2) (a) and (b) shall be duly protected.
4. (1) The Inspectorate shall register a pesticide or a toxic substance and issue a
certificate of registration in Form PTS 2 in the First Schedule, if satisfied that the pesticide
or toxic substance which is the subject of the application is suitable and effective for the
purposes for which it is intended without causing damage to the environment.
(2) A certificate of registration shall be-
(a) valid for a period of thirty-six months and may be renewed for a like period:
Provided that the Inspectorate may limit the validity of registration for
any period less than thirty-six months but not less than six months; and
(b) subject to the conditions which shall be determined by the Inspectorate.
(3) A pesticide or toxic substance registered under this regulation shall not be
altered in any way without approval of the Inspectorate so as to change its formulation,
composition or usage or in any other manner.
The Laws of Zambia
Copyright Ministry of Legal Affairs, Government of the Republic of Zambia
5. (1) No person, except a recognised research or educational institution, shall
import into Zambia, any experimental pesticide or toxic substance which is not registered
under these regulations without authority from the Inspectorate on Form PTS 4 set out in
the First Schedule.
Import of experimental
pesticide or toxic
substance
(2) An application to import any experimental pesticide and toxic substance shall be
made in Form PTS 3 set out in the First Schedule and shall be accompanied by the
appropriate fee.
(3) Any recognised research or education institution which imports an experimental
pesticide or toxic substance shall not later than seven days after the arrival of the
pesticide or toxic substance in Zambia, complete in triplicate and forward to the
Inspectorate Form PTS 5 set out in the Second Schedule.
(4) No experimental pesticide or toxic substance shall be offered to any person
other than a person approved by the Inspectorate to participate in the experimentation.
(5) No plants or products treated with experimental pesticide or toxic substance
shall be sold or disposed of or consumed without the prior written authority of the
Inspectorate.
(6) The label affixed to a container in which a pesticide or toxic substance is
imported for purposes of experiment, shall be clearly marked with the words "FOR
EXPERIMENTAL USES ONLY- NOT FOR SALE."
6. (1) No person shall transport pesticides or toxic substances unless they are
registered under these Regulations.
Transportation of
registered pesticides
or toxic substances
(2) Any person who transports pesticides or toxic substances shall use vehicles with
clear warning signs with symbols set out in the Third Schedule.
(3) A person who transports pesticides or toxic substances shall only transport
pesticides and toxic substances which are-
(a) clearly labelled in accordance with these Regulations;
(b) in packaging that will not allow leakage or spillage of product during
loading, transportation and offloading;
(c) not loaded in the same space with foodstuff or goods intended for human or
animal consumption or a container for human and animal use or clothing;
The Laws of Zambia
Copyright Ministry of Legal Affairs, Government of the Republic of Zambia
(d) conveyed by drivers who carry First Aid equipment and have necessary
basic handling and poisoning information on pesticides and toxic
substances; and
(e) in accordance with the guidelines set out in the Fourth Schedule.
(4) No person shall transport severely restricted pesticides or toxic substances-
(a) without the consent in writing of the Inspectorate;
(b) which are not labelled in accordance with these Regulations; or
(c) which results in deliberate disposal, or spillage into the environment.
PART III
LABELLING AND PACKAGING
7. (1) No person shall sell any pesticide or toxic substance without a label which
has been approved by the Inspectorate and which is securely fixed to the container.
Labelling
(2) The Inspectorate shall not approve a label for a pesticide or toxic substance
unless it states-
(a) the name and address of the company producing and distributing the
pesticide or toxic substance;
(b) the trade name and formulation of the pesticide or toxic substance;
(c) the common name of pesticide or toxic substance;
(d) the quantity by mass or volume of the pesticide or toxic substance;
(e) the use for which the pesticide or toxic substance is registered;
(f) the directions for use;
The Laws of Zambia
Copyright Ministry of Legal Affairs, Government of the Republic of Zambia
(g) the withholding period;
(h) in pictograms in accordance with the schedule of instructions set out in the
Fifth Schedule and warnings on safe use of the pesticide or toxic
substance;
(i) the hazard warnings of the contents of the pesticide or toxic substance in
accordance with the warnings set out in Part I and II of the Third Schedule;
(j) the warning against the re-use of containers and instructions for safe
disposal of surplus or expired pesticide or toxic substance or
decontamination of empty containers in accordance with the Ninth
Schedule;
(k) the first aid instructions and medical advice treatment;
(l) the date of manufacture and the date of expiry;
(m) the net contents of the pesticide or toxic substance; and
(n) any other information the Inspectorate may require.
(3) The label on a pesticide or toxic substance shall be large enough to be read
easily and shall be of durable quality.
(4) No pesticide or toxic substance shall be transported within Zambia to a
destination where it will be further processed, packed or re-packed for retail trade without
the label affixed in accordance with sub-regulation (1), (2) and (3).
(5) No person shall use a label which contains inaccurate or untrue claims relating
to the safety, non-toxicity or harmlessness or composition of the pesticide or toxic
substance.
8. (1) No person shall pack a pesticide or toxic substance in a container which- Packaging
(a) will react chemically or physically with the substance it is to contain; and
(b) is not of sufficient strength for handling and transportation to prevent the
escape of the pesticide or toxic substance.
The Laws of Zambia
Copyright Ministry of Legal Affairs, Government of the Republic of Zambia
(2) No person shall re-pack, decant or dispense any pesticide or toxic substance
into food or beverage containers.
(3) No person shall load for transportation any packages which are damaged,
severely corroded or which show evidence of leakage.
(4) No person shall use very dangerous or dangerous pesticide or toxic substance
which are set out in Part III of the Seventh Schedule or open the container and repack
such a substance in any other container, unless there is adequate provision for-
(a) all the persons involved to be made aware of the hazardous nature of the
pesticide or toxic substance and take all the necessary precautions in the
handling of that substance, including the wearing of appropriate protective
clothing;
(b) appropriate measures for the safety of any other person who may be at risk
from exposure to that substance; and
(c) the immediate availability of facilities for the administration of the
appropriate First Aid treatment, and the right personnel to deal with
emergency situations.
(5) No person other than that person in whose name a pesticide or toxic substance
is registered in terms of these regulations may open the container of that pesticide or toxic
substance and repack it for sale.
(6) The Inspectorate may direct any person in whose name a pesticide or toxic
substance is registered in terms of these regulations to submit for inspection and approval
the container of that pesticide or toxic substance.
PART IV
GENERAL HANDLING, USE AND SAFETY
9. (1) A person who uses a pesticide or toxic substance, in the form of dust,
vapours or very small spray droplets, the container of which bears or is required to bear a
label with a warning "very dangerous poison" or "poison" or where application of the
pesticide or toxic substance is in confined places, shall use suitable and effective cartridge
type respirators, or masks with special canisters, in accordance with the Eighth Schedule,
whichever is appropriate.
The Laws of Zambia
Copyright Ministry of Legal Affairs, Government of the Republic of Zambia
(2) A person who fumigates or applies a pesticide or toxic substance, the container
of which bears or is required to bear a label with a warning "very dangerous poison" or
"poison" shall use a suitable respiratory so that none of the contaminated ambient air is
inhaled.
(3) No person shall authorise or order the wearing of a respirator when the canister
or cartridge has exceeded the service life specified by the manufacturer.
(4) No woman who is pregnant or child who is under 16 years of age shall be
employed in the handling of pesticides or toxic substances.
(5) All employees shall display or make available a copy of this regulation to all the
employees who are involved in the handling of a pesticide or toxic substance.
(6) All employers of persons handling pesticides and toxic substances shall cause
their employees to undergo medical checkups every six (6) months to assess the
pesticides or toxic substance levels and effects.
(7) All manufacturers, formulators and those involved in repackaging of pesticides or
toxic substances shall install dust and vapour extractors.
(8) All employers shall provide washing facilities for persons handling pesticides or
toxic substances.
(9) No person shall be allowed to eat, drink or smoke whilst handling pesticides or
toxic substances.
(10) All employers shall ensure availability of adequate, suitable and accessible fire
extinguishers in the handling area.
PART V
STORAGE AND DISPOSAL
10. (1) Pesticides and toxic substances shall be stored in a warehouse which- Conditions of storage
of pesticide or toxic
substance
(a) can be securely locked;
The Laws of Zambia
Copyright Ministry of Legal Affairs, Government of the Republic of Zambia
(b) has walls and frames made of material that is non-combustible;
(c) has floors made of concrete and is impervious to liquids;
(d) has a roof designed to prevent smoke accumulating in it in case of fire;
(e) contains two clearly labelled and accessible emergency exits;
(f) is separated from office accommodation;
(g) contains a handling area where the floor is at the height of a vehicle bed;
(h) is adequately lit and ventilated on the lower and upper parts of the walls
and roof;
(i) has a separate drainage system for rain water drainage;
(j) has floor surrounded by bunding and has hazard and safety signs displayed
at appropriate places;
(k) has compartments for separating pesticides or toxic substances according
to uses, classes and other appropriate categories;
(l) has adequate, suitable and accessible fire extinguishers; and
(m) meets the conditions set out in the Seventh Schedule.
(2) Pesticides and toxic substances shall be stored out of doors only if-
(a) they are fenced and locked in;
(b) the floor of the storage area is made of concrete and is bunded; and
(c) hazard and safety signs are displayed at appropriate places.
The Laws of Zambia
Copyright Ministry of Legal Affairs, Government of the Republic of Zambia
11. Pesticides and toxic substances shall be disposed of in accordance with-
(a) the scheme of disposal submitted with the application to register the
pesticide or toxic substance;
(b) the instructions on the label and accompanying leaflet of a pesticide or toxic
substance; and
(c) the requirements and conditions set out in the Ninth Schedule.
Disposal of pesticides
or toxic substances
PART V
MISCELLANEOUS
12. (1) The Minister may, by statutory order and in consultation with the Council,
ban or severely restrict the use of any pesticide or toxic substance specified in such
notice.
Banned or severely
restricted pesticides or
toxic substances
(2) The pesticide or toxic substance which is banned under this regulation shall-
(a) be withdrawn from sale and all other uses within six months from the date
of publication of the statutory order; and
(b) be exported only with the approval of the Inspectorate and on such
conditions as it may determine.
13. The Inspectorate shall maintain a register of the registered pesticides and toxic
substances and of banned and severely restricted pesticides and toxic substances.
Register of pesticides
and toxic substances
14. (1) Any person who has in his possession surplus expired pesticides or toxic
substances shall within three months of the expiry inform the Inspectorate in Form PTS 6
set out in the Second Schedule.
Duty to report
possession and supply
information about
expired pesticide or
toxic substances
(2) Any person who manufactures imports or processes pesticides or toxic
substances registered under these Regulations shall submit a record of quantities used
and not used and associated storage or other problems relating to the pesticides or toxic
substances to the Inspectorate every six months from the date of registration.
15. (1) If the Inspectorate has reasonable cause to believe that a person is
contravening any of the provisions of these Regulations or a condition of registration the
Inspectorate shall serve an enforcement notice on that person.
Enforcement notice
The Laws of Zambia
Copyright Ministry of Legal Affairs, Government of the Republic of Zambia
(2) An enforcement notice shall-
(a) state the belief regarding the contravention or the likely contravention of the
provisions of these Regulations or a condition of the registration and specify
the matters constituting the contravention or making it likely that the
contravention will arise, as the case may be;
(b) specify the steps that have to be taken to remedy the contravention or
avoid the contravention, as the case may be; and
(c) specify the time limit within which the steps described under paragraph (d)
have to be taken.
16. Any person who contravenes any of the provisions of these Regulations or a
condition of registration after an enforcement notice has been issued under regulation 15-
(a) shall have the registration cancelled; and
(b) shall be guilty of an offence and shall be liable upon conviction to a fine
provided in section sixty-four of the Act.
Offences and
penalties
FIRST SCHEDULE
(PRESCRIBED FORMS)
The Laws of Zambia
Copyright Ministry of Legal Affairs, Government of the Republic of Zambia
(Regulations 3, 4, 5 and 14)
Form PTS 1
REPUBLIC OF ZAMBIA
ENVIRONMENTAL COUNCIL
Pollution (Pesticides and Toxic Substances) Regulations
The Laws of Zambia
Copyright Ministry of Legal Affairs, Government of the Republic of Zambia
(To be completed in triplicate)
To: The Chief Inspector (Pollution Control)
Environmental Council
P.O. Box 35131
LUSAKA
1. Name of Applicant:
2. Address of applicant:
(a) Postal..........................................................................................................................................................................
(b) Business......................................................................................................................................................................
..................................................................................................................................................................................
..................................................................................................................................................................................
3. Type of pesticide (insecticide, herbicide, fungicide, etc) or toxic substances (e.g. cyanide, benzene);..................................
................................................................................................................................................................................................
................................................................................................................................................................................................
A. Information to be submitted with this application for all pesticides, toxic substances and for which registration is sought.
 1. Trade name:...........................................................................................................................................................................
 2. Full chemical name of each ingredient:................................................................................................................................
 3. Common name of each active ingredient:............................................................................................................................
..............................................................................................................................................................................................
 4. The empirical and structural formula for each active ingredient:..........................................................................................
....................................................................................................................................................................................................
 5. Formulation (type of formulation: wettable powder, emulsifiable concentrate,
etc.)..............................................................................................................................................................................................
..............................................................................................................................................................................................
 6. Percentage of purity on a mass-by-mass or mass by volume basis (specify) of each active ingredient and other
ingredients (including inert matter) in the pesticide/toxic substance stating which percentage applies to each ingredient:........
............................................................................................................................................................................................
............................................................................................................................................................................................
 7. Physical and chemical properties of each ingredient with specific reference to type of formulation:....................................
..............................................................................................................................................................................................
7.1. Appearance:.........................................................................................................................................................................
7.2 Density (for liquids only) ........................................................................................................................................................
7.3 Flammability: liquids flash point ...........................................................................................................................................
........................................................................................solids; statement to be made as to whether product is flammable
..............................................................................................................................................................................................
7.4 Wettability (for dispersible powders)......................................................................................................................................
7.5 Suspensibility (for dispersible powders, suspension concentrates) ......................................................................................
..............................................................................................................................................................................................
7.6 Emulsion stability (for emulsifiable concentrates).................................................................................................................
..............................................................................................................................................................................................
..............................................................................................................................................................................................
7.7 Corrosiveness.......................................................................................................................................................................
7.8 Known incompatibilities with other products (specify) ..........................................................................................................
..............................................................................................................................................................................................
..............................................................................................................................................................................................
 8. Size of containers in which pesticides or toxic substance is to be sold and the net weight or volume:................................
..............................................................................................................................................................................................
 9. Nature of containers in which pesticide or toxic substance is to be sold:..............................................................................
..............................................................................................................................................................................................
10. Stability of formulation:
(a) on storage (at temperature of 25 degree C+-3 degree C):..........................................................................................
The Laws of Zambia
Copyright Ministry of Legal Affairs, Government of the Republic of Zambia
The Laws of Zambia
Copyright Ministry of Legal Affairs, Government of the Republic of Zambia
REPUBLIC OF ZAMBIA
Form PTS 2
ENVIRONMENTAL COUNCIL
Pollution Control (Pesticides and Toxic Substances) Regulations
CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION
(Regulation 4(1))
Number:
To:
of:................................................................................................................................................................................................
is hereby registered as a ............................................................................................................................................................
....................................................................................................................................................................................................
Registration is from ...........................................................................................19 ....................................................................
Registration is subject to the following conditions:
....................................................................................................................................................................................................
....................................................................................................................................................................................................
....................................................................................................................................................................................................
It is hereby:
(a) Certified that the pesticide/toxic substance referred to in Form PTS 1 has been registered; and
(b) Approval has been granted of the labels and advertisements copies of which are attached hereto, and which
are to be used in connection with the said pesticide/toxic substance.
................................................................................................ ................................................................................................
 Date and Official stamp Chief Inspector
 (Pollution Control)
The Laws of Zambia
Copyright Ministry of Legal Affairs, Government of the Republic of Zambia
REPUBLIC OF ZAMBIA
ENVIRONMENTAL COUNCIL
Pollution Control (Pesticides and Toxic Substances) Regulations
Form PTS 3
APPLICATION TO IMPORT EXPERIMENTAL PESTICIDE OR TOXIC SUBSTANCE TO BE USED ONLY FOR
EXPERIMENTATION
(Regulation 5 (2))
The Laws of Zambia
Copyright Ministry of Legal Affairs, Government of the Republic of Zambia
(To be completed in triplicate)
To: The Chief Inspector (Pollution Control)
Environmental Council
P.O. Box 35131
Lusaka
 1. Name of applicant:................................................................................................................................................................
..............................................................................................................................................................................................
 2. Address of applicant:
(a) Postal:..........................................................................................................................................................................
..................................................................................................................................................................................
(b) Business:.....................................................................................................................................................................
..................................................................................................................................................................................
 3. Types of pesticide or toxic substance (insecticide, herbicide, cyanide etc):
..............................................................................................................................................................................................
..............................................................................................................................................................................................
 4. Active ingredient: ..................................................................................................................................................................
 5. Toxicological data; and animals (state type of animal)
(a) Oral LD 50: ..................................................................................................................................................................
(b) Dermal LD 50: ............................................................................................................................................................
(c) Inhalation LD 50. ........................................................................................................................................................
 6. Trade name ..........................................................................................................................................................................
 7. Common name: ....................................................................................................................................................................
 8. Approximate quantity: ..........................................................................................................................................................
 9. Intended use: ........................................................................................................................................................................
10. Proposed duration of experiment (commencing date and finishing date):
..............................................................................................................................................................................................
11. Person conducting trials and academic qualification: ..........................................................................................................
..............................................................................................................................................................................................
12. Name of manufacturer: ........................................................................................................................................................
13. Address of manufacturer: ......................................................................................................................................................
..............................................................................................................................................................................................
..............................................................................................................................................................................................
 I hereby apply to import, under the Pollution Control (Pesticide and Toxic Substances) Regulations, the Pesticide/Toxic
Substance for experimental purposes particulars of which are given above.
................................................................................................ ................................................................................................
 Date Signature of applicant and
 Official stamp
For Official use only:
Date application received ............................................................................................................................................................
Experimental Registration Number: ............................................................................................................................................
The Application to import: ..............................................................................................................has/has not been approved.
Reasons for non-approval...........................................................................................................................................................
....................................................................................................................................................................................................
....................................................................................................................................................................................................
.............................................................................................. ................................................................................................
 Date and Official stamp Chief Inspector
 (Pollution Control)
The Laws of Zambia
Copyright Ministry of Legal Affairs, Government of the Republic of Zambia
The Laws of Zambia
Copyright Ministry of Legal Affairs, Government of the Republic of Zambia
REPUBLIC OF ZAMBIA
Form PTS 4
ENVIRONMENTAL COUNCIL
Pollution Control (Pesticides and Toxic Substances) Regulations
AUTHORITY TO IMPORT EXPERIMENTAL PESTICIDES FOR TOXIC SUBSTANCES
(Regulation 5)
Number:
To: ..............................................................................................................................................................................................
of
Date application received ............................................................................................................................................................
I hereby certify that authority to import pesticide/toxic substance ..............................................................................................
for experimental purposes only has been granted.
The experimental registration number is: ....................................................................................................................................
The registration expires on: ......................................................................................................................................................
and is subject to the following conditions: . ................................................................................................................................
....................................................................................................................................................................................................
....................................................................................................................................................................................................
The application to import ............................................................................................................................................................
has/has not been approved.
Reasons for non-approval ..........................................................................................................................................................
....................................................................................................................................................................................................
....................................................................................................................................................................................................
.............................................................................................. ................................................................................................
 Date and Official stamp Chief Inspector
 (Pollution Control)
The Laws of Zambia
Copyright Ministry of Legal Affairs, Government of the Republic of Zambia
SECOND SCHEDULE
(Regulation 3)
PRESCRIBED FEES
 Application of or registration of Fee units
 pesticide or toxic substance 78,750
 (1,000 US Dollars)
LUSAKA
[MENR ...............................................] ............................................................................................................
 Minister of Environment and
 Natural Resources
(As amended by Act No. 13 of 1994)
The Laws of Zambia
Copyright Ministry of Legal Affairs, Government of the Republic of Zambia
REPUBLIC OF ZAMBIA
ENVIRONMENTAL COUNCIL
Form PTS 5
Pollution Control (Pesticides and Toxic Substances) Regulations
NOTICE OF IMPORT OF EXPERIMENTAL, PESTICIDE OR TOXIC SUBSTANCES
(Regulation 5(3))
(To be submitted in triplicate)
1. Name of Research Institute ....................................................................................................................................................
................................................................................................................................................................................................
2. Address of the Research Institute:
(a) Postal ..........................................................................................................................................................................
(b) Business ....................................................................................................................................................................
Telephone................................................................................................................Telex ................................................
Telefax ..............................................................................................................................................................................
3. Type of pesticide/toxic substances (insecticide, herbicide, rodenticide, cyanide, benzene, etc) ............................................
................................................................................................................................................................................................
4. Registration number ................................................................................................................................................................
5. Trade name ............................................................................................................................................................................
6. Common name ......................................................................................................................................................................
7. Approximate quantity ..............................................................................................................................................................
8. Expiry date ..............................................................................................................................................................................
9. Proposed use ..........................................................................................................................................................................
....................................................................................................................................................................................................
.................................................................................................... ............................................................................................
 Date Signature of Scientist and
 Official stamp
The Laws of Zambia
Copyright Ministry of Legal Affairs, Government of the Republic of Zambia
REPUBLIC OF ZAMBIA
ENVIRONMENTAL COUNCIL
Form PTS 6
Pollution Control (Pesticides and Toxic Substances) Regulations
NOTICE OF POSSESSION OF EXPIRED PESTICIDES OR TOXIC SUBSTANCES
(Regulation 14)
The Laws of Zambia
Copyright Ministry of Legal Affairs, Government of the Republic of Zambia
(To be submitted in triplicate)
To: The Chief Inspector (Pollution Control)
Environmental Council
P.O. Box 31531
LUSAKA
 1. Name of owner of expired pesticide or toxic substance ........................................................................................................
..............................................................................................................................................................................................
 2. Address ................................................................................................................................................................................
(a) Postal ..........................................................................................................................................................................
(b) Business ....................................................................................................................................................................
 3. Type of pesticide or toxic substance ....................................................................................................................................
..............................................................................................................................................................................................
 4. Trade name............................................................................................................................................................................
 5. Full chemical name................................................................................................................................................................
 6. Common name of each active ingredient ............................................................................................................................
..............................................................................................................................................................................................
 7. Formulation ..........................................................................................................................................................................
..............................................................................................................................................................................................
 8. Toxicology Data on Humans and laboratory animals (specify)
(a) Oral LD 50
(b) Dermal LD 50
(c) Inhalation LD 50
 9. Phyto-toxicity ........................................................................................................................................................................
10. Quantity of expired pesticide or toxic substance ..................................................................................................................
..............................................................................................................................................................................................
11. Instructions on handling precautions ....................................................................................................................................
..............................................................................................................................................................................................
12. Directions for safe disposal ..................................................................................................................................................
..............................................................................................................................................................................................
13. Pesticide or toxic substance registration number ................................................................................................................
..............................................................................................................................................................................................
I hereby notify you of the above expired pesticide/toxic substance in my possession. The pesticides/toxic substance
expired before use because ........................................................................................................................................................
....................................................................................................................................................................................................
....................................................................................................................................................................................................
.................................................................................................... ............................................................................................
 Date Signature of applicant and
 Official stamp
For official use only:
Date notification received:............................................................................................................................................................
Date Registration number checked ............................................................................................................................................
Your notification has been received and the inspectorate (state action) ....................................................................................
....................................................................................................................................................................................................
....................................................................................................................................................................................................
.................................................................................................... ............................................................................................
 Date Chief Inspector (Pollution Control)
 Environmental Council
The Laws of Zambia
Copyright Ministry of Legal Affairs, Government of the Republic of Zambia
THIRD SCHEDULE
(Regulations 6(2) and 7)
SYMBOLS FOR WARNING SIGNS FOR VEHICLES
TRANSPORTING PESTICIDE OR TOXIC SUBSTANCES
PART I
B
 1. The hazardous-warning signs that shall be used on hazard-warning panels and compartment labels during
transportation of toxic substances are set out in part II.
 2. The hazard-warning signs that shall be used when transporting pesticides are set out in Part III.
 3. Each hazard-warning panel for pesticides and toxic substances shall be in form of an equilateral triangle and a square
set with its side at an angle of 45 degrees to the verticle respectively and the length of the sides shall be-
(a) in the case of signs on hazard-warning panels, 200 millimetres or
(b) in the case of signs on compartments labels 95 millimetres.
 4. Signs for hazard-warning panels shall, for any part of the sign that is not black, have a black border at least 5
millimetre wide.
 Toxic Part II
Description of sign Symbol Lettering Background
Flammable liquids Black Black Red
Flammable gases Black Black Red
Flammable solid Black Black White with verticle red stripes
Corrosive substances Black White White upper half black lower half
Toxic gases Black Black White
Organic peroxides Black Black Yellow
Oxidising substances Black Black Yellow
Substances emitting
flammable gases when
in contact with water Black Black Blue
Spontaneously
half combustible Black Black White upper
 half
Harmful substances Black Black Red lower half white upper half
The Laws of Zambia
Copyright Ministry of Legal Affairs, Government of the Republic of Zambia
PART III
 Symbol
colour code
Pesticide Toxicity Warning Additional
(i) Acute oral LD 50 Red Very dangerous Skull and
up to 50mg/kg: poison cross bones
(ii) Acute dermal Red Very dangerous Skull and
LD50 up to poison cross bones
200mg/kg
(iii) Acute inhalation Red Very dangerous Skull and
LC50 up to poison cross bones
200mg/m3/4h
(iv) Acute oral LD50 Purple Dangerous Skull and
51-500mg/kg poison cross bones
(v) Acute dermal LD50 Purple Dangerous Skull and
201-2, 000mg/kg poison cross bones
(vi) Acute inhalation Purple Dangerous Skull and
LD50 201-2,000mg/m poison cross bones
3/4h
(vii) Acute oral LD50 501 Amber Poison
2,001mg/kg
(viii) Acute dermal LD50 Amber Poison
2,001mg/kg
(ix) Acute inhalation LC50 Amber Poison
2,001-20,000mg/m 3/4h
(x) Acute oral LD50 greater Green Harmful if swallowed
 than 20,000mg/kg
(xi) Acute dermal LD 50 Green Harmful
(xii) Acute inhalation LC50 Green Harmful
 greater than
 20,000mg/m3
(xiii) Acute inhalation LC50 Green Harmful
 greater than
 20,000mg/m3
Pesticide shall be classified according to colour, symbol and warning it carries;
Symbol Warning
Colour code
Red Very dangerous poison
Purple Dangerous poison
Amber Poison
Green Harmful
FOURTH SCHEDULE
(Regulation 6)
GUIDELINES FOR TRANSPORTATION OF PESTICIDES AND TOXIC SUBSTANCES
1. Ensure that the emergency procedure information relating to the pesticide(s) or toxic substances
card is in the vehicle.
2. Ensure that all hazard warnings are displayed, not obstructed and that they are kept clean at all
times.
3. Follow the route as advised by the transporter or operator.
4. Ensure that the vehicle is not left unattended at any time.
5. Ensure that the vehicle has certificate of fitness.
6. Ensure that the First Aid Equipment is in the vehicle.
The Laws of Zambia
Copyright Ministry of Legal Affairs, Government of the Republic of Zambia
FIFTH SCHEDULE
(Regulation 7)
PICTOGRAMS (FAO, WHO and GIFAP)
 The following pictograms shall be put on labels to complete labelling; they will be put on labels either as singly or in
combination with appropriate one stop give complete instructions:
A pictogram showing Pictogram showing Pictogram to show
a product kept in instruction on that product is
safety by key and lock washing dangerous to animals
Dangerous to aquatic Instructions to Instructions to
life wear safety goggles wear protective gloves
Instructions on type Instructions to use Instructions to
of wear complete face shield use respirators
SEVENTH SCHEDULE
The Laws of Zambia
Copyright Ministry of Legal Affairs, Government of the Republic of Zambia
(Regulation 10)
1. Warehousing and Storage
(a) The pesticide and toxic substances warehouse should be located away from homes,
highly populated areas, drinking water sources and areas liable to flooding.
(b) The floors in the building should be of concrete with a load bearing capacity sufficient to
withstand the weight of the stock, ranking and any mechanical handling equipment to be
used. Floors should be impervious to liquids, free from cracks and smooth to facilitate
cleaning.
(c) The building should be designed such that escape in case of emergency should be
possible from any enclosed area in at least two directions. Emergency exits should be
clearly marked.
(d) The warehouse should have access from at least two sides to facilitate fire fighting,
regardless of wind directions and also facilitate easy escape from an enclosed area.
(e) All warehouses constructed above ground level should have special provision for
bunding. This can be achieved, for example by constructing ramps across external
doorways of existing warehouses.
(f) The building should permit reasonable movement of materials and enough space to allow
hygienic working conditions and clear access to fire-fighting equipment.
(g) The walls of the warehouse should be of non-flammable type and all pipings and electrical
wiring should be sealed.
(h) The roof of the warehouse should be able to effectively keep out rain, be able to provide
both ventilation to allow fumes and heat to escape in case of fire and at the same time
provide protection against direct sunlight.
(i) The warehouse should have drains which should not be directly linked to waterways or
public sewers. They should instead be linked by a closed system, to an evaporation tank.
(j) The evaporation tank should be emptied from time to time depending on the accumulation
of solid waste. It should be covered during the rainy season to avoid filling by rain water.
2. (a) All products should be stored under lock and key with proper warning signs displayed
clearly to keep away unauthorised persons. Pesticides and toxic substances must be
stored in a separate warehouse, away from any other goods especially foods and
stockfeeds.
(b) Before storing any pesticides ensure that they are properly labelled and are of good
quality and acceptable condition. If any of the products are not in good condition, do not
store them together with other products but take appropriate action.
(c) If pesticides and toxic substances are to be stacked inside the warehouse, stacking
heights should not exceed three metres unless the use of racking prevents overloading
of the lower tiers.
(d) Persons loading pesticides and toxic substances in the warehouse should pay special
attention to "THIS SIDE UP" signs on cartoned packs.
(e) Pesticides and toxic substances should be stored separately, preferably according to their
use in the field e.g. herbicides, insecticides etc. The objective of this is to prevent cross
contamination as well as minimise the risk of fire and consequent environmental
contamination often presented by mixed storage arrangements.
 3. (a) All stocks in the warehouse should be frequently inspected for leakages, caking of
powders, pulverisation of granules, sedimentation or gelling of liquids, change in colour
due to oxidation, dampness of packages and corrosion or deterioration of containers. All
leakages must be treated as being extremely toxic.
(b) Spillages should not be cleaned out with water. They must be swept up and kept in a
special labelled container awaiting safe disposal. Liquids should first be absorbed by saw
dust, earth or any other absorbent before being swept out.
(c) Every warehouse must have an emergency spills treatment kit consisting of a PVC
apron, neoprene gloves, a gas mask, a brush or broom, a dust pan, an empty clearly
labelled container (for collecting wastes) a container of sawdust and a spade.
(d) Always strictly follow the rule "First-in First-out" i.e. new stocks should be moved to the
rear.
EIGHTH SCHEDULE
The Laws of Zambia
Copyright Ministry of Legal Affairs, Government of the Republic of Zambia
(Regulation 9)
PROTECTIVE CLOTHING AND EQUIPMENT
A. Any person involved in the manufacture and formulation of pesticides or toxic substances must
ensure that the following protective clothing is available to the employees:
(i) acid resistant or chemical resistant overalls or dust coats with buttons to the neck;
(ii) acid resistant or chemical resistant trousers and coat or suit;
(iii) PVC gloves;
(iv) PVC aprons;
(v) rubber boots;
(vi) respirator canisters with filters specific for dust, mist, fumes, gases and vapour;
(vii) face shields covering eyes and face;
B. To clean-up spills the following should be available:
(i) absorbent material (saw dust, sand, earth or powdered lime);
(ii) washing detergent;
(iii) brooms
(iv) shovels, spades; and
(v) funnels.
When self contained breathing apparatus is to be used only persons properly trained and
experienced in the correct procedure should be allowed to use them.
NINTH SCHEDULE
The Laws of Zambia
Copyright Ministry of Legal Affairs, Government of the Republic of Zambia
(Regulation 11)
Disposal Options
 Pesticides, toxic substances, wastes, those which are expired, spillage and left over diluted
product and packaging material can be disposed of in the following manner:
1. Product use by Recycling
 If an alternative use exists the product may be reused or may be reformulated for the purpose for
which it is intended to be used.
2.High Temperature Incineration (High Temperature Thermal Oxidation)
 Should be considered when disposing of most pesticides and toxic substances, but should NOT be
used when disposing-
(a) inorganic materials;
(b) organic products containing heavy metals such as mercury and lead;
3. Chemical Treatment
 To be used as a disposal technology for a few specific unformulated pesticides and some other
toxic substances. The products of decomposition from such treatment should not present toxic or
environmental hazard.
4. Long Term Storage
 Certain compounds cannot be disposed of safely using existing technology. Such compounds
include those containing heavy metals and in particular, organomercury compounds.
 The only available option is to contain and store these products safely until a suitably acceptable
disposal technology is developed.
 A full risk analysis should be made for all materials stored to ensure maximum safety over the
longest foreseeable period of time.
5. Landfill (for Incinerator Ash and SLG Only)
 Landfilling is not an acceptable disposal option for pesticides and toxic wastes which can be
leached. Incinerator ash and slag can be disposed of at approved landfill sites.
6. Waste Solidifications/Fixation
 The process involves the mixing of chemical and other waste with building materials such as
cement, silicates and plymers, causing the mixtures to solidify into an impervious mass. Waste
treated in this way can be disposed of at a landfill. This should be applicable to inorganic wastes.
Organic wastes could easily leach into ground water with time, and should therefore not be used in
disposing organic pesticides or toxic substances.
7. Packaging Materials Disposal
 Contaminated packaging material shall be disposed of as follows:
(a) Contaminated Packaging material-Cartons, boxes and bags should be cut and rendered
non-usable. The waste should be overpacked in plastic bags to minimise the risk for
exposure during handling:
(i) Burning in a simple incinerator, or on a hot fire in isolated area downwind of the
nearest habitation.
(ii) Burial in an approved landfill
(b) Small Packs
 Small packaging shall be drained well to reduce residues to a minimum by triple-rinsing with water
or an appropriate solvent such as diesel fuel. The triple rinsed packaging material should be made
unusable by shredding or crushing. Combustible packaging material should be incinerated.
 Non-combustible crushed containers should be buried in a landfill site.
 Small packs which cannot be or have not been triple rinsed should be over-packed in strong
polyethylene bags or preferably 200 litre steel drums for disposal as toxic wastes.
(c) Large containers
 Effort must be made to drain the maximum amount of residue from each container prior to triple
rinsing with water or suitable solvent and disposed of as follows:
 (i) Steel Drums
 Triple-rinsed and drained drums should be crushed, to render them unusable and disposed
of by either:
 -STEEL SMELTING-This is the preferred option. Where the drums are processed at high
The Laws of Zambia
Copyright Ministry of Legal Affairs, Government of the Republic of Zambia
10. Return to Manufacturer-Where a manufacturer is willing to accept pesticides or toxic substances
wastes or expired obsolete stocks, this will be accepted as a disposal option.
SECTIONS 55 AND 96-THE WASTE MANAGEMENT (LICENSING OF TRANSPORTERS OF
WASTES AND WASTE DISPOSAL SITES) REGULATIONS
Regulations by the Minister
Statutory Instrument
71 of 1993
134 of 1996
1. These Regulations may be cited as the Waste Management (Licensing of
Transporters of Wastes and Waste Disposal Sites) Regulations.
Title
2. In these Regulations unless the context otherwise requires- Interpretation
"disposal site" means the land or water area on which waste disposal facilities are
physically located;
"Inspectorate" means the Environmental Inspectorate established under section
eighty-one of the Act; and
"wastes" subject to regulation 3, includes hazardous wastes and shall have the
meanings assigned to them in the Act.
3. These Regulations shall not apply to-
(a) domestic waste from residential household of forty-five kilograms weight or
less per week; and
(b) the transportation of construction and demolition debris to licensed disposal
sites.
Application
4. (1) A person intending to transport wastes or operate a waste disposal site or
plant shall apply for a licence to the Inspectorate in Forms WM1 and WM2 of the First
Schedule respectively and shall be accompanied by the appropriate fee set out in the
Second Schedule.
Application for licence
to transport wastes or
operate waste
disposal plant
(2) A person who transports wastes or owns or operates a waste disposal site or
plant before the commencement of these Regulations shall apply for a licence within thirty
days from the commencement of these Regulations.
5. (1) The Inspectorate shall issue a licence to transport wastes in form WM3 of the
First Schedule ifLicence to transport
wastes
The Laws of Zambia
Copyright Ministry of Legal Affairs, Government of the Republic of Zambia
(a) satisfied that the applicant has adequate and appropriate facilities and
equipment to transport wastes without causing significant damage to the
environment;
(b) satisfied with collection schedule of wastes of the applicant; and
(c) the Inspectorate had published its intention to issue the licence by notice in
the Gazette, twenty-eight days before the issue of the licence.
(2) A licence to transport wastes shall be subject to the following conditions:
(a) The collection and transportation of wastes shall be conducted in a manner
that would not cause scattering of the waste.
(b) The vehicles, pipelines and equipment for the transportation of waste shall
be in such a state as not to cause the scattering of or the flowing out of the
wastes or the emitting of bad smells from the wastes.
(c) The vehicles for the transportation of wastes shall follow the approved
schedule routes from the point of collection to the disposal site or plant.
(d) The personnel involved in the collection and transportation of wastes shall
be provided with-
(i) adequate protective and safety clothing;
(ii) adequate appropriate equipment or facilities for loading wastes; and
(iii) safe and secure sitting facilities in the vehicles for transporting
wastes.
(e) The personnel involved in the collection and transportation of wastes shall
undergo an annual medical check up.
(f) Any other condition which the Inspectorate shall consider relevant for the
transportation of wastes.
(3) A licence to transport wastes shall be valid for thirty-six months and may be
renewed for a like period:
Provided that the Inspectorate may limit the validity of the licence for any period less
than thirty-six months but not less than six months, when necessary.
(4) An Inspector may at any reasonable time stop and inspect any vehicle used for
the transportation of wastes.
The Laws of Zambia
Copyright Ministry of Legal Affairs, Government of the Republic of Zambia
6. (1) The Inspectorate shall issue a licence in Form WM4 of the First Schedule to
own or operate a waste disposal site or plant ifLicence to own or
operate a waste
disposal site or plant
(a) approval has been obtained from the town and country planning authority
on the location of the waste disposal site or plant;
(b) satisfied that the owner or operator of the waste disposal site or plant has
the ability and the appropriate facilities to manage the waste disposal site or
plant without causing significant damage to the environment; taking into
account the summary of the environmental impact statement submitted by
the owner or operator; and
(c) notice has been given by the Gazette on the proposed waste disposal site
or plant, twenty-eight days before the issue of the licence.
(2) A licence to own or operate a waste disposal site or plant shall be subject to the
following conditions:
(a) the waste disposal site or plant shall be enclosed and secure from
scavenging;
(b) the waste disposal site or plant shall have hazard and safety signs
displayed at appropriate places indicating the disposal site or plant;
(c) the waste disposal site or plant shall be operated in a way which would-
(i) avoid polluting surface and underground water;
(ii) avoid the emitting of bad smells from the site or plant to levels
beyond that approved by the Inspectorate;
(iii) prevent the breeding of rats, mosquitoes or other vermin at the site
or plant;
(d) the wastes at the disposal site or plant shall be compacted to a thickness of
approximately three metres or less for each layer of waste and each layer
shall be covered with thirty centimetres of soil;
(e) means of ventilation shall be provided at the disposal site or plant to
remove bio-gas generated from the disposal site or plant;
The Laws of Zambia
Copyright Ministry of Legal Affairs, Government of the Republic of Zambia
(f) the personnel working at the waste disposal site or plant shall be provided
with-
(i) adequate protective and safety clothing;
(ii) adequate water and appropriate equipment or facilities for the
operations of the disposal site or plant;
(iii) first aid facilities and training;
(g) the personnel working at the waste disposal site or plant shall undergo an
annual medical check up;
(h) human waste or sewage shall be disposed of at a waste disposal site or
plant after sewage treatment;
(i) measures to control and prevent scattering of papers or other light waste
materials shall be installed at the waste disposal site or plant; and
(j) any other conditions which the Inspectorate shall consider relevant for the
operation of the waste disposal site or plant.
(3) A licence to own or operate a waste disposal site or plant shall be valid for
thirty-six months and may be renewed for a like period:
Provided that the Inspectorate may limit the validity of the licence for any period less
than thirty-six months, but not less than six months when necessary.
(4) An Inspector may at any time, enter and inspect any waste disposal site or plant.
(5) Any person who-
(a) operates or owns a waste management disposal site without a licence; or
(b) discharges waste onto a site or plant which is unlicensed;
shall be guilty of an offence.
7. (1) The holder of a licence under these Regulations shall- Duty to keep records
(a) keep a record of the licensed activities; and
(b) submit the record referred to in paragraph (a) to the Inspectorate every six
months from the commencement of the licensed activities.
The Laws of Zambia
Copyright Ministry of Legal Affairs, Government of the Republic of Zambia
(2) The Inspectorate may order the holder of a licence under these Regulations to
install, at the expense of the holder of the licence, metering devices and to take samples
and analyse them as the Inspectorate may direct.
8. The Inspectorate shall maintain a licences register of holders of licences to
transport wastes or operate wastes disposal sites or plants.
Register of licences
9. (1) If the Inspectorate has reasonable cause to believe that a person is
contravening any of the provisions of these Regulations or a condition of the licence is or
is likely to be contravened, the Inspectorate shall serve an enforcement notice on that
person.
Enforcement notice
(2) An enforcement notice shall-
(a) state the belief regarding the contravention or the likely contravention of the
provisions of these Regulations or a condition of the licence and specify the
matters constituting the contravention or making it likely that the
contravention will arise, as the case may be;
(b) specify the steps that have to be taken to remedy the contravention or
avoid the contravention, as the case may be; and
(c) specify the time limit within which the steps described under paragraph (b)
have to be taken.
10. Any person who contravenes any of the provisions of these Regulations or a
condition of a licence after an enforcement notice has been issued under regulation 9-
(a) shall have the licence revoked; and
(b) shall be guilty of an offence and shall be liable upon conviction to a fine or
conviction as set out in section ninety-one of the Act.
Offences and
penalties
FIRST SCHEDULE
PRESCRIBED FORMS
(Regulations 4, 5 and 6)
REPUBLIC OF ZAMBIA
The Laws of Zambia
Copyright Ministry of Legal Affairs, Government of the Republic of Zambia
ENVIRONMENTAL COUNCIL
Form WM1
The Waste Management (Licensing of Transporters of Wastes and
Waste Disposal Sites) Regulations
APPLICATION TO TRANSPORT WASTES
(Regulation 4)
(To be completed in Triplicate)
To: The Chief Inspector (Pollution Control)
Environmental Council
P.O. Box 35131
Lusaka
Name and address of applicant..................................................................................................................................................
....................................................................................................................................................................................................
....................................................................................................................................................................................................
....................................................................................................................................................................................................
Number and type of vehicles to transport waste..........................................................................................................................
....................................................................................................................................................................................................
....................................................................................................................................................................................................
Facilities and equipment available on vehicles to transport wastes............................................................................................
....................................................................................................................................................................................................
....................................................................................................................................................................................................
Type of waste to be transported..................................................................................................................................................
....................................................................................................................................................................................................
....................................................................................................................................................................................................
Quantity of wastes per vehicle to be transported........................................................................................................................
....................................................................................................................................................................................................
....................................................................................................................................................................................................
Licensed sites/plant to which wastes are to be transported........................................................................................................
....................................................................................................................................................................................................
....................................................................................................................................................................................................
....................................................................................................................................................................................................
Collection schedule......................................................................................................................................................................
....................................................................................................................................................................................................
....................................................................................................................................................................................................
Collection frequency....................................................................................................................................................................
....................................................................................................................................................................................................
....................................................................................................................................................................................................
Any other information..................................................................................................................................................................
....................................................................................................................................................................................................
....................................................................................................................................................................................................
....................................................................................................................................................................................................
.............................................................................................. ...........................................................................................
 Date Signature
Designation/title..............................................
The Laws of Zambia
Copyright Ministry of Legal Affairs, Government of the Republic of Zambia
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Application received........................................................................................ Fee paid.........................................................
.......................................................................................................................
....................................................................................................
 Chief Inspector (Pollution Control)
 Environmental Council Inspectorate
The Laws of Zambia
Copyright Ministry of Legal Affairs, Government of the Republic of Zambia
Form WM2
REPUBLIC OF ZAMBIA
Environmental Council
The Waste Management (Licensing of Transporters of Wastes and Waste
Disposal Sites) Regulations
(To be completed in triplicate)
APPLICATION TO OWN/OPERATE WASTE DISPOSAL SITE/PLANT
The Laws of Zambia
Copyright Ministry of Legal Affairs, Government of the Republic of Zambia
(Regulation 4)
To: The Chief Inspector (Pollution Control)
Environmental Council
P.O. Box 35131
Lusaka
Name and address of applicant..................................................................................................................................................
....................................................................................................................................................................................................
....................................................................................................................................................................................................
Location of site/plant....................................................................................................................................................................
....................................................................................................................................................................................................
....................................................................................................................................................................................................
Approval of Town and Country Planning Authority......................................................................................................................
....................................................................................................................................................................................................
....................................................................................................................................................................................................
Type of wastes to be disposed of at site/plant............................................................................................................................
....................................................................................................................................................................................................
....................................................................................................................................................................................................
Quantity being disposed of/per annum tonne/Kg........................................................................................................................
....................................................................................................................................................................................................
....................................................................................................................................................................................................
Type of facilities/treatment to be carried on at site/plant
(a) Land fill ................................................................................................................................................................................
(b) Compost ..............................................................................................................................................................................
(c) Incinerator............................................................................................................................................................................
(d) Other-specify........................................................................................................................................................................
Estimated life span of plant/site..................................................................................................................................................
....................................................................................................................................................................................................
....................................................................................................................................................................................................
Proposed hectarage/area of site/plant (include site plan and design)........................................................................................
....................................................................................................................................................................................................
....................................................................................................................................................................................................
Summary of environmental impact statement..............................................................................................................................
....................................................................................................................................................................................................
....................................................................................................................................................................................................
Any other information..................................................................................................................................................................
....................................................................................................................................................................................................
....................................................................................................................................................................................................
.............................................................................................. ...........................................................................................
 Date Signature
Designation/title..............................................
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Application received........................................................................................ Fee paid.........................................................
.......................................................................................................................
....................................................................................................
 for Chief Inspector (Pollution Control)
Environmental Council Inspectorate
The Laws of Zambia
Copyright Ministry of Legal Affairs, Government of the Republic of Zambia
Form WM3
REPUBLIC OF ZAMBIA
Envirnmental Council
Waste Management (Licensing of Transporters of Wastes and Waste
Disposal sites) Regulations
LICENCE TO TRANSPORT WASTES
The Laws of Zambia
Copyright Ministry of Legal Affairs, Government of the Republic of Zambia
(Regulation 5)
Licence No. ................................................................................................................................................................................
....................................................................................................................................................................................................
....................................................................................................................................................................................................
Name..........................................................................................................................................................................................
Address........................................................................................................................................................................................
You are hereby licensed to transport wastes to..........................................................................................................................
....................................................................................................................................................................................................
....................................................................................................................................................................................................
from..............................................................................................................................................................................................
Number and type of vehicles licensed........................................................................................................................................
....................................................................................................................................................................................................
Type of wastes to be transported................................................................................................................................................
....................................................................................................................................................................................................
....................................................................................................................................................................................................
This licence is valid from................................................................................................................................................19.........
to......................................................................................................................19.........
Approval of Town and Country Planning Authority....................................................................................................................
....................................................................................................................................................................................................
....................................................................................................................................................................................................
Type of wastes to be disposed of at site/plant............................................................................................................................
....................................................................................................................................................................................................
....................................................................................................................................................................................................
Quantity being disposed of/per annum tonne/Kg........................................................................................................................
....................................................................................................................................................................................................
Type of facilities/treatment to be carried on at site/plant............................................................................................................
(a) Land fill..................................................................................................................................................................................
(b) Compost................................................................................................................................................................................
(c) Incinerator............................................................................................................................................................................
(d) Other-specify........................................................................................................................................................................
Estimated life span of plant/site..................................................................................................................................................
....................................................................................................................................................................................................
....................................................................................................................................................................................................
This licence is granted subject to the following conditions: ......................................................................................................
....................................................................................................................................................................................................
....................................................................................................................................................................................................
.............................................................................................. ...........................................................................................
 Date Chief Inspector (Pollution Control)
 Environmental Council Inspectorate
The Laws of Zambia
Copyright Ministry of Legal Affairs, Government of the Republic of Zambia
Form WM4
REPUBLIC OF ZAMBIA
Environmental Council
Waste Management (Licensing of Transporters of Wastes and Waste
Disposal Site) Regulations
LICENCE TO OWN/OPERATE WASTE DISPOSAL SITE/PLANT
(Regulation 6)
Licence No. ................................................................................................................................................................................
Name..........................................................................................................................................................................................
Address......................................................................................................................................................................................
....................................................................................................................................................................................................
You are hereby licensed to own/operate a waste disposal site/plant at Plot No. ......................................................................
Area.............................................................................................................................................................................................
Town..........................................................................................................................................................................................
or the following types of wastes..................................................................................................................................................
....................................................................................................................................................................................................
....................................................................................................................................................................................................
this licence is granted valid from.................................................................................................................................. 19.........
to.................................................................................................................................................................................... 19.........
The licence is subject to the following conditions......................................................................................................................
....................................................................................................................................................................................................
....................................................................................................................................................................................................
.............................................................................................. ...........................................................................................
 Date Chief Inspector (Pollution Control)
 Environmental Council Inspectorate
The Laws of Zambia
Copyright Ministry of Legal Affairs, Government of the Republic of Zambia
SECOND SCHEDULE
(Regulation 4)
1. Disposal Site Licence Fee units
(a) city and municipal councils and industries 555.5
(b) district councils and medical institutions 277.7
2. Transporters of Waste Licence
(i) city and municipal councils and industries and
commercial operators 277.7
(ii) district councils and medical institutions 166.6
(As amended by S.I. No. 134 of 1996)
SECTIONS 23, 34 AND 96-THE WATER POLLUTION CONTROL
(EFFLUENT AND WASTE WATER) REGULATIONS
Regulations by the Minister
Statutory Instrument
72 of 1993
177 of 1993
133 of 1996
Act No.
13 of 1994
1. These Regulations may cited as the Water Pollution Control (Effluent and Waste
Water) Regulations.
Title
2. In these Regulations unless the context otherwise requires- Interpretation
"aquatic environment" means all surface and ground waters, but does not include
water in installations and facilities for industrial effluent, sewage collection
and treatment;
"discharge" means spilling, leaking, pumping, pouring, emitting, emptying or
dumping;
"effluent" means waste water or other fluid of domestic, agricultural, trade or
industrial origin, treated or untreated and discharged directly or indirectly
into the aquatic environment;
"inspectorate" means the Environmental Inspectorate established under section
eighty-one of the Act;
"inspector" means a person appointed as such under section eighty-three;
"licence" means a licence to discharge effluent issued under section thirty-one;
The Laws of Zambia
Copyright Ministry of Legal Affairs, Government of the Republic of Zambia
"pollutant" means any substance or energy which if it enters or is discharged into
water may cause discomfort to, or endanger the health, safety and welfare
of persons, or may cause injury or damage to plant or animal life or
property, or which may interfere unreasonably with the normal enjoyment of
life or property or use of property or conduct of business, and those objects
or substances as may inadvertently obstruct or divert the natural flow of a
water course when discharged or dumped into it;
"sewage" means waste water generated by residential and commercial
establishments;
"sewage system" includes sewage treatment plants;
"waste water" means water which has been used for domestic, commercial,
agricultural, trading or industrial purposes and as a result of such uses may
cause water pollution when discharged into the aquatic environment; and
"water pollution" means the introduction, directly or indirectly of pollutants into an
aquatic environment.
3. (1) A local authority intending to operate a sewage system or owner or operator
of any industry or trade which will discharge effluent into the aquatic environment shall
apply to the Inspectorate for a licence in Form WP1 set out in the First Schedule and shall
pay the appropriate fee set out in the Second Schedule.
Application for licence
to discharge effluent
(2) A local authority operating a sewage system or owner or operator of any industry
or trade discharging effluent into the aquatic environment before the commencement of
these Regulations shall apply to the Inspectorate for a licence, referred to in
sub-regulation (1) within thirty days from the commencement of these Regulations.
(3) The application referred to in sub-regulation (1) shall contain information relating
to the quality and quantity of effluent, its treatment and such other information as the
Inspectorate may require.
(As amended by S.I. No. 177 of 1993)
4. (1) A person intending to withdraw water from a water course or any other source
for the purpose of diluting an effluent shall apply to the Inspectorate for a licence in Form
WP2 set out in the First Schedule and shall pay the appropriate fee set out in the Second
Schedule.
Application for licence
to withdraw water for
diluting effluent
(2) A person who has been withdrawing water from a water course or from any other
source for the purpose of diluting effluent before the commencement of these Regulations
shall apply for a licence referred to in sub-regulation (1) to the Inspectorate within thirty
days of the commencement of these Regulations.
The Laws of Zambia
Copyright Ministry of Legal Affairs, Government of the Republic of Zambia
(3) The application referred to in sub-regulation (1) shall contain information relating
to the amounts of water required, the treatment of effluent and such other information as
the Inspector may require.
5. (1) The Inspectorate shall issue a licence to discharge effluent in Form WP3 of
the First Schedule ifLicence to discharge
effluent
(a) satisfied that the application has adequate and appropriate facilities and
equipment for pre-treatment and the effluent will not cause significant
damage to the environment;
(b) the Inspectorate had published its intention to issue the licence by notice in
the Gazette, twenty-eight days before the issue of the licence.
(2) The licence to discharge effluent into the aquatic environment shall-
(a) conform to the conditions and standards for chemical and physical
parameters contained in the table of standards for effluent and waste water,
set out in the Third Schedule;
(b) be subject to such other conditions as the Inspectorate may determine; and
(c) be valid for thirty-six months and may be renewed for a like period:
 Provided that the Inspectorate may limit the validity of the licence for any
period less than thirty-six but not less than six months, when necessary.
6. (1) The Inspectorate shall issue a licence to withdraw water from a water course
or other source for the purpose of diluting effluent in Form WP 4 of the First Schedule ifLicence to withdraw
water for treatment of
effluent
(a) satisfied that the water being withdrawn from the water course or source
would not significantly affect the life of the water course or source;
(b) satisfied that the applicant will treat the effluent in a manner that would not
have any adverse effect on the aquatic environment;
(c) the Inspectorate has published the intention to issue the licence by notice in
the Gazette, twenty-eight days before the issue of the licence.
(2) The licence to withdraw water from a water course or source for the treatment of
effluent shall-
The Laws of Zambia
Copyright Ministry of Legal Affairs, Government of the Republic of Zambia
(a) be subject to such conditions as the Inspectorate may determine; and
(b) be valid for thirty-six months and may be renewed for a like period:
Provided that the Inspectorate may limit the validity of the licence for any period
less than thirty-six months but not less than six months, when necessary.
7. (1) The holder of a licence under these Regulations shall- Duty to keep records
(a) keep a record of the licensed activities;
(b) submit the record referred to in paragraph (a) to the Inspectorate every six
months from the commencement of the licensed activities; and
(c) report to the Inspectorate any abnormal discharge of effluent.
(2) The Inspectorate may order the holder of a licence under these Regulations to
instal at the expense of the holder of the licence, metering devices and to take samples
and analyse them as the Inspectorate may direct.
8. An Inspectorate may at any reasonable time enter any premises on which a
licensed activity is being conducted and take samples and analyse and examine materials
used for the licensed activity.
Sampling of effluent
and analysis
9. The Inspectorate shall maintain a register of holders of licences to discharge
effluent into the aquatic environment or to withdraw water from a water course or any
other source for the purpose of diluting an effluent.
Register of licences
10. Any person who-
(a) operates or owns a sewage system or an industry or trade which
discharges effluent into the aquatic environment without a licence; or
(b) withdraws water from a water course for the purpose of diluting effluent
without a licence;
shall be guilty of an offence.
Offences
11. (1) If the Inspectorate has reasonable cause to believe that a person is
contravening any of the provisions of these Regulations or any conditions of a licence or is
likely to contravene any of the provisions of these Regulations or a condition of the
licence, the Inspectorate shall serve an enforcement notice on that person.
Enforcement notice
The Laws of Zambia
Copyright Ministry of Legal Affairs, Government of the Republic of Zambia
(2) An enforcement notice shall-
(a) state the belief regarding the contravention of the Regulations or a
condition of the licence and specify the matter constituting the
contravention or making it likely that the contravention will arise, as the
case may be;
(b) specify the steps that have to be taken to remedy the contravention or
avoid the contravention, as the case may be; and
(c) specify the time limit within which the steps described under paragraph (b)
have to be taken.
12. Any person who contravenes any of the provisions of these Regulations or a
condition of the licence after an enforcement notice has been issued under regulation 11-
(a) shall have the licence revoked; and
(b) shall be guilty of an offence and shall be liable upon conviction to a fine not
exceeding two thousand penalty units or imprisonment for a period not
exceeding three years or to both.
(As amended by Act No. 13 of 1994)
Penalties
FIRST SCHEDULE
PRESCRIBED FORMS
(Regulations 3, 4, 5 and 6)
REPUBLIC OF ZAMBIA
Environmental Council
Form WP 1
The Water Pollution Control (Effluent and Waste Water) Regulations
APPLICATION TO DISCHARGE EFFLUENT
(Regulation 3)
The Laws of Zambia
Copyright Ministry of Legal Affairs, Government of the Republic of Zambia
(To be completed in Triplicate)
To: The Chief Inspector (Pollution Control)
Environmental Council
P.O. Box 35131
Lusaka
Name and address of applicant..................................................................................................................................................
....................................................................................................................................................................................................
....................................................................................................................................................................................................
Location of Plant/Industry............................................................................................................................................................
....................................................................................................................................................................................................
....................................................................................................................................................................................................
Indicate source of raw water (lake, river, well, common pipe)
....................................................................................................................................................................................................
....................................................................................................................................................................................................
....................................................................................................................................................................................................
Location of raw water (lake, river, etc.)
....................................................................................................................................................................................................
....................................................................................................................................................................................................
Raw water demand........................................................................................................................................................ m3/year
................................................................................................................................................ m3/day max
................................................................................................................................................ m3/day min
.............................................................................................................................................. m3/hour max
Water-meter Yes/No
Raw water treatment methods
....................................................................................................................................................................................................
....................................................................................................................................................................................................
Raw water quality
pH ..............................................................................................................................................................................................
Total dissolved solids.......................................................................................................................................................... mg/L
Total suspended solids...................................................................................................................................................... mg/L
Conductivity...................................................................................................................................................................... US/cm
Is part of raw water used to dilute effluent prior to discharge?
....................................................................................................................................................................................................
....................................................................................................................................................................................................
....................................................................................................................................................................................................
....................................................................................................................................................................................................
Type of effluent Discharge Discharge Discharge
(cooling, process, m3/day m3/day m3/year
municipal, etc.) min max average
....................................................................................................................................................................................................
....................................................................................................................................................................................................
....................................................................................................................................................................................................
Point of entry of effluent into water course/aquatic environment
....................................................................................................................................................................................................
....................................................................................................................................................................................................
....................................................................................................................................................................................................
The Laws of Zambia
Copyright Ministry of Legal Affairs, Government of the Republic of Zambia
WASTE WATER QUALITY
The Laws of Zambia
Copyright Ministry of Legal Affairs, Government of the Republic of Zambia
A. Physical
 1. Temperature (thermometer) ................................................................................................................C
 2. Colour (hazen units) ................................................................................................Hazen Units
 3. Odour and Taste
 (threshold odour number) ....................................................................................................................
 4. Turbidity (NTU scale) ............................................................................................................NTU
 5. Total suspended solid
 (gravimetric method) ............................................................................................................mg/L
 6. Settleable matter sedimentation
 in 2 hours (imhoff funnel) ............................................................................................................mg/L
 7. Total dissolved solids (evaporation
 @105c and gravimetric method) ............................................................................................................mg/L
 8. Conductivity (electrometric method) ........................................................................................................US/cm
B. Bacteriological
 9. Total coliform/100 ml
 (membrane filtration method) ....................................................................................................................
10. Faecal coliform/100 ml
 (membrane filtration method) ....................................................................................................................
11. Algae/100 ml
 (colony counter) ............................................................................................................cells
C. Chemical
12. pH (0-14 scale) (electrometric method) ....................................................................................................................
13. Dissolved oxygen mg oxygen/Litre
 (modified winkler method
 and membrane electrode method) ............................................................................................................mg/L
14. Chemical oxygen demand
 (COD) (dichromat method) ............................................................................................................mg/L
15. Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD)
 (modified winkler method and
 membrane electrode method ............................................................................................................mg/L
16. Nitrates (NO3 as nitrogen)
 (spectrophotometric method and
 electrometric method) ............................................................................................................mg/L
17. Nitrate (NO2 as nitrogen/L
 (spectrophotometric
 sulphanilamide) ............................................................................................................mg/L
18. Organic nitrogen (spectrophotometric
 method N-Kjeldal) ............................................................................................................mg/L
19. Ammonia and ammonium
 (total) (NH3 as N/L)
 (nesslerization method and
 electrometric method) ............................................................................................................mg/L
20. Cyanides (spectrophotometric method) ............................................................................................................mg/L
21. Phosphorous (total)(PO4 as P/L)
 (colorimetric method) ............................................................................................................mg/L
22. Sulphates (turbidimetric method) ............................................................................................................mg/L
23. Sulfite (iodometric method) ............................................................................................................mg/L
24. Sulphide (iodometric and
 electrometric method) ............................................................................................................mg/L
25. Chlorides CI/L (silver nitrate
 and mercuric nitrate) ............................................................................................................mg/L
26. Active chloride C12/L
 iodometric method) ..............................................................................................................g/L
27. Active bromine (Br2/L) ............................................................................................................mg/L
28. Fluorides F/L (electrometric
 method and colorimetric method
 with distillation) ............................................................................................................mg/L
C. Metals
29. Aluminum compounds (atomic
 absorption method) ............................................................................................................mg/L
30. Antimony (atomic absorption
 method) ............................................................................................................mg/L
The Laws of Zambia
Copyright Ministry of Legal Affairs, Government of the Republic of Zambia
FOR OFFICE USE ONLY
Application received ........................................................... Fee paid..........................................................................................
Chief Inspector (Pollution Control)
Environmental Council
Inspectorate
The Laws of Zambia
Copyright Ministry of Legal Affairs, Government of the Republic of Zambia
REPUBLIC OF ZAMBIA
Environmental Council
Form WP 2
The Water Pollution Control (Effluent and Waste Water) Regulations
APPLICATION TO WITHDRAW WATER FOR TREATMENT OF EFFLUENT
(Regulation 4)
The Laws of Zambia
Copyright Ministry of Legal Affairs, Government of the Republic of Zambia
(To be completed in Triplicate)
To: The Chief Inspector (Pollution Control)
Environmental Council
P.O. Box 35131
Lusaka
Name and Address of applicant..................................................................................................................................................
....................................................................................................................................................................................................
....................................................................................................................................................................................................
Location of plant/industry............................................................................................................................................................
....................................................................................................................................................................................................
....................................................................................................................................................................................................
Location of raw water (lake, river, etc.)......................................................................................................................................
....................................................................................................................................................................................................
....................................................................................................................................................................................................
....................................................................................................................................................................................................
Raw water demand........................................................................................................................................................m3/year
................................................................................................................................................m3/day max
..................................................................................................................................................m3/day min
................................................................................................................................................m3/hour max
Water-meter Yes/No....................................................................................................................................................................
Raw water treatment methods....................................................................................................................................................
....................................................................................................................................................................................................
Raw water quality........................................................................................................................................................................
PH................................................................................................................................................................................................
Total dissolved solids..........................................................................................................................................................mg/L
Total suspended solids........................................................................................................................................................mg/L
Conductivity......................................................................................................................................................................US/cm
Type of Effluent Discharge Discharge Discharge
(cooling, process m3/day min m3/day max average
municipal, etc.)
....................................................................................................................................................................................................
....................................................................................................................................................................................................
Point of entry of effluent into watercourse/aquatic environment..... ............................................................................................
WASTE WATER QUALITY
A. Physical
 1. Temperature (thermometer) ................................................................................................C
 2. Colour (hazen units) ................................................................................Hazen Units
 3. Odour and Taste (threshold
 odour number) ....................................................................................................
 4. Turbidity (NTU scale) ............................................................................................NTU
 5. Total suspended solids
 (gravimetric method) ............................................................................................mg/L
 6. Settleable matter sedimentation
 in 2 hours (imhoff funnel) ............................................................................................mg/L
 7. Total dissolved solids (evaporation
 @ 105 C and gravimetric method) ............................................................................................mg/L
 8. Conductivity (electrometric method) ........................................................................................US/cm
B. Bacteriological
 9. Total coliform/100ml (membrane
 filtration method) ....................................................................................................
10. Faecal coliform/100 ml ....................................................................................................
The Laws of Zambia
Copyright Ministry of Legal Affairs, Government of the Republic of Zambia
FOR OFFICE USE ONLY
Application received...................................................... Fee Paid........................................................................................
Chief Inspector (Pollution Control)
Environmental Council
Inspectorate
The Laws of Zambia
Copyright Ministry of Legal Affairs, Government of the Republic of Zambia
REPUBLIC OF ZAMBIA
Environmental Council
Form WP 3
The Water Pollution Control (Effluent and Waste Water) Regulations
LICENCE TO DISCHARGE EFFLUENT
(Regulation 5)
Licence No...................................................................................................................................................................................
Name..........................................................................................................................................................................................
Address.......................................................................................................................................................................................
You are hereby licensed to discharge effluent at ........................................................................................................................
....................................................................................................................................................................................................
...................................................................................................................................................................................................
....................................................................................................................................................................................................
....................................................................................................................................................................................................
The licence is valid from..............................................................................................................................................................
............................................................................................................................................................ 19....................................
The licence is subject to the following conditions
....................................................................................................................................................................................................
....................................................................................................................................................................................................
....................................................................................................................................................................................................
....................................................................................................................................................................................................
....................................................................................................................................................................................................
Date:............................................................................................................................................................................................
....................................................................................................................................................................................................
....................................................................................................................................................................................................
Chief Inspector (Pollution Control)
Environmental Council
Inspectorate
The Laws of Zambia
Copyright Ministry of Legal Affairs, Government of the Republic of Zambia
REPUBLIC OF ZAMBIA
Environmental Council
Form WP 4
The Water Pollution Control (Effluent and Waste Water) Regulations
LICENCE TO WITHDRAW WATER FOR TREATMENT OF EFFLUENT
(Regulation 6)
Licence No...................................................................................................................................................................................
Name..........................................................................................................................................................................................
Address........................................................................................................................................................................................
....................................................................................................................................................................................................
You are hereby licensed to withdraw water for the treatment of effluent from............................................................................
....................................................................................................................................................................................................
....................................................................................................................................................................................................
quantity........................................................................................................................................................................................
This licence is valid from.................................................................................................................................... 19....................
to........................................................................................................................................................................ 19....................
....................................................................................................................................................................................................
This licence is subject to the following conditions:
....................................................................................................................................................................................................
....................................................................................................................................................................................................
....................................................................................................................................................................................................
....................................................................................................................................................................................................
Date............................................................................................................................................................................................
....................................................................................................................................................................................................
Chief Inspector (Pollution Control)
Environmental Council
Inspectorate
The Laws of Zambia
Copyright Ministry of Legal Affairs, Government of the Republic of Zambia
SECOND SCHEDULE
(Regulations 3 and 4)
PRESCRIBED FEES
 Fee units
Application for licence to discharge effluent
(a) city council, municipal councils and industries 555.5
(b) district councils 277.7
Application for licence to withdraw water for treatment of effluent 833.3
(As amended by S.I. No. 133 of 1996)
THIRD SCHEDULE
(Regulation 5 (2))
TABLE OF STANDARDS (LIMITS) FOR EFFLUENT AND WASTE WATER
The Laws of Zambia
Copyright Ministry of Legal Affairs, Government of the Republic of Zambia
Column 1 Column 2
PARAMETER EFFLUENT AND WASTE WATER INTO
 AQUATIC ENVIRONMENT
A. Physical
1. Temperature
 (thermometer) 40 degreesC at the point of entry
2. Colour (hazen units) 20 Hazen units
3. Odour and taste Must not cause any deterioration
 (threshold odour in taste or odour as compared with
 number) natural state
4. Turbidity (NTU scale) 15 Nephelometer turbidity units
5. Total suspended solids 100 mg/L Must not cause formation
 (gravimetric method) of sludge or scum in receiving
 water
6. Settleable matter 0.5 mg/L in two hours must not
 sedimentation in cause formation of sludge in
 2 hours (Imhoff receiving water
 funnel)
7. Total dissolved solids 3000 mg/L the TDS of waste water
 (evaporation <\ 105C must not adversely affect surface
 and gravimetric water
 method)
8. Conductivity 4300 US/em
 (electrometric
 method)
B. Bacteriological
9. Total coliform/100 ml 25,000
 (membrane filtration
 method)
10. Faecal coliform/100 ml 5000
 (membrane filtration
 method)
11. Algae/100 ml 1000 cells
C. Chemical
12. pH (0-14 scale) (electrometric
 method) 6.0-9.0
13. Dissolved oxygen mg oxygen/Litre 5 mg/L after complete mixing
 (modified winkler method and extreme temperature may
 membrane electrode method) result in lower values
14. Chemical oxygen demand COD based on the limiting
 (COD) (dichromat method) values for organic carbon 90
 mg 02/L average for 24 hours a
15. Biochemical oxygen demand 50 mg/L 02 (mean value over a
 (BOD) (modified winkler 24 hour period) According
 method and membrane to circumstances in relation to
 electrode method) self to the self cleaning
 capacity of the waters
16. Nitrates NO3 as nitrogen) The nitrates burden must be
 (spectrometric method reduced as far as possible
 and electrometric method according to circumstances>
 water course 50 mg/L lakes 20 mg/L
17. Nitrite (NO2 as nitrogen/L
 spectrophotometric
 sulphanilamide) 2.0 mg N02 as N/L
18. Organic nitrogen (spectro
 photometric method
 N-Kjelda) (*the % of
 nutrient elements for
 degradation of BOD should
 be 0.4-1% for phosphorous
 (different for processes
 using algae) 5.0 mg/L Mean*
Column 1 Column 2
PARAMETER EFFLUENT AND WASTE WATER INTO
The Laws of Zambia
Copyright Ministry of Legal Affairs, Government of the Republic of Zambia
SECTIONS 37, 46 AND 96-THE AIR POLLUTION CONTROL
(LICENSING AND EMISSION STANDARDS) REGULATIONS
Regulations by the Minister
Statutory Instrument
141 of 1996
24 of 1997
1. These Regulations may be cited as the Air Pollution Control (Licensing and
Emission Standards) Regulations, and shall come into effect on the expiration of a period
of ninety days after publication in the Gazette.
Title and
commencement
2. In these Regulations, unless the context otherwise requires- Interpretation
"Council" means the Environmental Council established by section three of the Act;
"emission" means the discharge into the atmosphere of a pollutant from a specified
source in solid, liquid or gaseous state;
"emission limit" means the limit, level, rate, amount or concentration of a given
substance discharged in the air that must not be exceeded;
"imission" means pollutants in solid, liquid or gaseous state that are present in the
air outside a plant on the surface of the ground, approximately one and a
half metres above ground level;
"Inspectorate" means the Environmental Inspectorate established under section
eighty-one of the Act;
"intermediate emission limit" means an emission limit that is of higher levels than
the long term emission limit, but is in the interim acceptable to the
Inspectorate;
"long term emission limit" means an emission limit that is the ultimate acceptable
limit;
"licence" means a licence to emit air pollutants into the ambient air issued under
these Regulations;
"operator" in relation to works, industry, undertaking or business means the person
having the control of the works, undertaking or business; and
"permit" means a temporary or intermediate permit to discharge air pollutants
issued under regulations 8 and 9.
The Laws of Zambia
Copyright Ministry of Legal Affairs, Government of the Republic of Zambia
3. The Council shall, in accordance with the guidelines set out in the First
Schedule, assess the quality of ambient air in order to safeguard the general health,
safety or welfare of persons, animal life, plant life or property affected by the works,
industrial or business activities undertaken by an operator.
Ambient air quality
guidelines
4. (1) The long term emission limits shall be as set out in the Third Schedule. Long term emission
limits
(2) The long term emission limits shall-
(a) apply to any new plant, undertaking or process that is emitting air
pollutants; and
(b) be complied with by an operator of any new plant, undertaking or process
before a licence under regulation 6 is issued by the Inspectorate.
(3) The Inspectorate may determine the period of time within which an operator of a
plant, undertaking or process shall meet the long term emission limit.
5. (1) Any person who intends to erect or install a new industrial plant, undertaking
or process which is likely to cause air pollution shallApplication for licence
to emit air pollutants
(a) register with the Inspectorate during the planning stages;
(b) apply for a licence in Form AP1 set out in the Second Schedule; and
(c) pay the appropriate fee set out in the Fourth Schedule.
(2) The application for a licence made under sub-regulation (1) shall be submitted to
the Inspectorate at least six months prior to the commencement of new operations.
(3) Any person operating an existing plant, undertaking or process that conforms to
the long term emission limits shall-
(a) apply for a licence in Form AP1 set out in the Second Schedule; and
(b) pay the appropriate fee set out in the Fourth Schedule.
The Laws of Zambia
Copyright Ministry of Legal Affairs, Government of the Republic of Zambia
(4) The application for a licence made under sub-regulation (3) shall be submitted to
the Inspectorate within twelve months after the commencement of these Regulations.
6. (1) The Inspectorate shall issue a licence to discharge air pollutants in Form AP2
set out in the Second ScheduleLicence to emit air
pollutants
(a) after taking into account the details specified in section forty-five of the Act;
and
(b) if the Inspectorate has published its intention to issue the licence by notice
in the Gazette, twenty-eight days before the issue of the licence.
(2) The licence to discharge air pollutants shall-
(a) conform to the long-term emission limits set out in the Third Schedule; and
(b) be subject to such other conditions as the Inspectorate may determine.
(3) The licence issued under sub-regulation (1) shall be valid for thirty-six months
and may be renewed for a further period:
Provided that the Inspectorate may limit the validity of the licence for any period less
than thirty-six months but not less than six months when necessary.
7. (1) Any person who intends to make a new extension to an existing plant,
undertaking or process as described under section forty-four of the Act, which is likely to
cause air pollution shallApplication for licence
for new sources of
emissions
(a) notify the Inspectorate during the planning stages;
(b) apply for a licence in Form AP5 as set out in the Second Schedule; and
(c) pay the appropriate fee set out in the Fourth Schedule.
(2) The application for a licence for new sources of emissions shall be submitted to
the Inspectorate at least six months prior to the commencement of operations.
8. (1) The Inspectorate shall issue a licence for a new source of emission in Form
AP6 set out in the Second Schedule ifLicence for new
sources of emissions
The Laws of Zambia
Copyright Ministry of Legal Affairs, Government of the Republic of Zambia
(a) it is satisfied that the details set out in section forty-five of the Act have
been met by the applicant; and
(b) the new source of emission conforms to the long-term emission limits set
out in the Third Schedule.
(2) A licence issued under sub-regulation (1) shall be valid for thirty-six months and
may be renewed for a further period.
Provided that the Inspectorate may limit the validity of the licence for any period less
than thirty-six months but not less than six months when necessary.
9. (1) The intermediate emission limits shall be determined by the Inspectorate on
the basis of the details set out in sub-regulation (2) of regulation 11.
Intermediate emission
limits
(2) The intermediate emission limits specified under sub-regulation (1) shall apply to
any existing plant, undertaking or process that commenced its activities before the
commencement of these Regulations.
10. An owner or operator of an industrial plant, undertaking or process who, before
the commencement of these Regulations, is emitting air pollutants or who the Inspectorate
so requires, shall within twelve months from the commencement of these RegulationsApplication for permit
to emit air pollutants
(a) apply for a permit in Form AP3 set out in the Second Schedule; and
(b) pay the appropriate fee set out in the Fourth Schedule.
11. (1) The Inspectorate shall issue a permit to discharge air pollutants in Form
AP4 set out in the Second SchedulePermit to emit air
pollutants
(a) after taking into account the details set out in section forty-five of the Act;
(b) if the applicant undertakes to comply with conditions specified under
sub-regulation (2); and
(c) if the Inspectorate has published its intention to issue the permit by notice in
the Gazette twenty-eight days before the issue of the permit.
The Laws of Zambia
Copyright Ministry of Legal Affairs, Government of the Republic of Zambia
(2) The permit to discharge air pollutants shall be subject to intermediate emission
limits and such conditions specified for a particular period of time, as may be determined
by the Inspectorate on the basis of-
(a) the age and technology of the plant;
(b) the ability of the operator to install cleaning equipment; and
(c) such other facts as the inspectorate may consider necessary;
(3) The permit shall be valid for such period as may be determined by the
Inspectorate.
12. (1) The Inspectorate shall consider an application for a licence or a permit
within ninety days after the receipt of the application, and shall notify the applicant of its
decision.
Period for
consideration of
licence or permit
(2) If a licence or permit is not granted, the Inspectorate shall, in the notice of
refusal, state the reasons for the refusal.
13. An applicant aggrieved with the decision of the Inspectorate under regulation
12, may appeal to the Council, within fourteen days of the decision.
Appeals
14. (1) The holder of a licence or permit under these Regulations shall- General conditions of
licence or permit
(a) install, at the holder's expense, air measuring devices, collect such samples
and conduct such analyses as the Inspectorate may direct;
(b) operate an internal air emission monitoring system, approved by the
Inspectorate of the licenced or permitted activities;
(c) submit monthly emission returns, together with a declaration testifying that
the entries are correct; and
(d) report immediately, to the Inspectorate any abnormal emissions.
(2) The returns referred to in paragraph (b) of sub-regulation (1) shall be submitted
to the Inspectorate on or before the thirtieth day of the month following the month to which
they relate, or as may be directed by the Inspectorate.
The Laws of Zambia
Copyright Ministry of Legal Affairs, Government of the Republic of Zambia
15. A person shall not conduct any open air burning of any waste from industrial,
commercial operations, domestic or community activities except with the written consent
of the Inspectorate.
Restriction against
open air burning
16. (1) Where the Inspectorate has reasonable cause to believe that a person has
contravened any of the provisions of these Regulations, or any condition of a licence or
permit, or is likely to contravene any or the provisions of these Regulations or a condition
of a licence or permit, the Inspectorate shall serve an enforcement notice on that person.
Enforcement notice
(2) An enforcement notice served under sub-regulation (1) shall-
(a) state the provisions or condition of the licence or permit, as the case may
be, which have been contravened or are likely to be contravened;
(b) specify the steps to be taken to remedy the contravention or avoid the
contravention, as the case may be; and
(c) specify the time limit within which the steps described under paragraph (b)
should be taken.
(3) Any person who contravenes any of the provisions of these Regulations or a
condition of a licence or permit after an enforcement notice has been issued under this
Regulation shall be guilty of an offence and shall-
(a) have the licence or permit revoked; and
(b) be liable upon conviction to the penalty specified under section ninety-one
of the Act.
(As amended by S.I. No. 24 of 1997)
FIRST SCHEDULE
(Regulation 3)
TABLE OF GUIDELINE LIMITS FOR AMBIENT AIR POLLUTANTS
PARAMETER REFERENCE TIME GUIDELINE LIMIT
1. Sulphur dioxide (SO2) 10 minutes 500 g/m3
1 hour 350 g/m3
The Laws of Zambia
Copyright Ministry of Legal Affairs, Government of the Republic of Zambia
2. Sulphur dioxide (SO2)
 in combination with
 total suspended particles
(TSP)*1 and (PM10)
SO2 24 hours 125 g/m3
6 months 50 g/m3
TSP 24 hours 120 g/m3
6 months 50 g/m3
PM10 24 hours 70 g/m3
3. Respirable particulate
 matter (PM10
*2)
PM10 24 hours 70 g/m3
4. Oxides of nitrogen (NOx) 1 hour 400 g/m3
24 hours 150 g/m3
5. Carbon monoxide (CO) 15 minutes 100 g/m3
30 minutes 60 g/m3
1 hour 30 g/m3
8 hours 10 g/m3
6. Ambient Lead (Pb) 3 months 1.5 g/m3
12 months 1.0 g/m3
7. Dust fall 30 days 7.5 tonnes/km2
*1. Total suspended particles (TSP) are particles with diameter less than 45 micrometers (mm).
*2. Respirable particles (PM10) are particles with diameter less than 10 micrometers (mm). These can penetrate to
the ancilliated regions of the deep lung.
Note: Reference time are the 98th percentile averaging times.
The Laws of Zambia
Copyright Ministry of Legal Affairs, Government of the Republic of Zambia
FORM AP1
SECOND SCHEDULE
(Regulations 5 and 6)
PRESCRIBED FORMS
REPUBLIC OF ZAMBIA
ENVIRONMENTAL COUNCIL
THE AIR POLLUTION CONTROL (LICENSING AND EMISSION STANDARDS)
REGULATIONS, 1996
APPLICATION FOR LICENCE TO EMIT AIR POLLUTANTS
The Laws of Zambia
Copyright Ministry of Legal Affairs, Government of the Republic of Zambia
(To be completed in triplicate)
CATEGORY: (A) New plant, undertaking or process
 (B) Existing plant, undertaking or process meeting long-term emission limits (Delete inapplicable)
To: The Chief Inspector (Pollution Control)
Environmental Council of Zambia
P.O. Box 35131
Lusaka
 1. Name and address of applicant:..........................................................................................................................................
..........................................................................................................................................................................................
...................................................................................................................................Tel:..........................................Fax:
 2. Location of plant/activity........................................................................................................................................................
..........................................................................................................................................................................................
 3. Type(s) of activity (e.g. copper mining, cement manufacture etc.)......................................................................................
..........................................................................................................................................................................................
..........................................................................................................................................................................................
 4. Name(s) of department(s) section(s) unit(s) where air emission occur................................................................................
..........................................................................................................................................................................................
..........................................................................................................................................................................................
..........................................................................................................................................................................................
 5. Name(s) and type(s) of raw materials used in the process(es)............................................................................................
..........................................................................................................................................................................................
..........................................................................................................................................................................................
 6. Amount of each raw material used yearly (kg)......................................................................................................................
..........................................................................................................................................................................................
 7. Name(s) and types of products............................................................................................................................................
..........................................................................................................................................................................................
 8. Sources of air emissions......................................................................................................................................................
..........................................................................................................................................................................................
..........................................................................................................................................................................................
 9. Name(s) and type(s) of air pollutants....................................................................................................................................
..........................................................................................................................................................................................
..........................................................................................................................................................................................
10. Rate of emission of each air pollutant discharged into the ambient air (kg/h. ton/yr)
..........................................................................................................................................................................................
..........................................................................................................................................................................................
..........................................................................................................................................................................................
..........................................................................................................................................................................................
11. Concentration of each air pollutant discharged into the ambient air (mg/m3, mg/m3, ppm etc.)
..........................................................................................................................................................................................
..........................................................................................................................................................................................
12. Energy source used (e.g. coal, diesel etc.)..........................................................................................................................
..........................................................................................................................................................................................
..........................................................................................................................................................................................
13. Amount of each energy source used yearly (kg)..................................................................................................................
..........................................................................................................................................................................................
..........................................................................................................................................................................................
14. Amount of each energy source used per day (kg)................................................................................................................
The Laws of Zambia
Copyright Ministry of Legal Affairs, Government of the Republic of Zambia
The Laws of Zambia
Copyright Ministry of Legal Affairs, Government of the Republic of Zambia
FORM AP2
(Regulation 6)
REPUBLIC OF ZAMBIA
ENVIRONMENTAL COUNCIL
THE AIR POLLUTION CONTROL (LICENSING AND EMISSION STANDARDS)
REGULATIONS, 1996
LICENCE TO EMIT AIR POLLUTANTS
(To be completed in triplicate)
CATEGORY: (A) New plant, undertaking or process
 (B) Existing plant, undertaking or process meeting long-term emission limits (Delete inapplicable)
Licence No.
Name: ........................................................................................................................................................................................
Address: ......................................................................................................................................................................................
You are hereby licenced to discharge emissions into the ambient air at (location)
....................................................................................................................................................................................................
....................................................................................................................................................................................................
The licence is valid from............................................to..............................................................................................................
The licence is subject to the attached conditions and long-term emission limits set out in the Regulations.
Date: ..........................................................................................
....................................................................................................
Chief Inspector (Pollution Control) Environmental Council of
Zambia Inspectorate
The Laws of Zambia
Copyright Ministry of Legal Affairs, Government of the Republic of Zambia
FORM AP3
PRESCRIBED FORMS
REPUBLIC OF ZAMBIA
ENVIRONMENTAL COUNCIL
THE AIR CONTROL (LICENSING AND EMISSION STANDARDS)
REGULATIONS, 1996
APPLICATION FOR LICENCE TO EMIT AIR POLLUTANTS
(Regulation 10)
The Laws of Zambia
Copyright Ministry of Legal Affairs, Government of the Republic of Zambia
(To be completed in triplicate)
To: The Chief Inspector (Pollution Control)
Environmental Council of Zambia
P.O. Box 35131
Lusaka
 1. Name and address of applicant:........................................................................................................................................
 ..........................................................................................................................................................................................
 ........................................Tel:..........................................Fax:............................................................................................
 2. Location of plant/activity....................................................................................................................................................
 ..........................................................................................................................................................................................
 3. Type(s) of activity (e.g. copper mining, cement manufacture etc.)....................................................................................
 ..........................................................................................................................................................................................
 4. Name(s) of department(s) section(s) unit(s) where air emission occur............................................................................
 ..........................................................................................................................................................................................
 5. Name(s) and type(s) of raw materials used in the process(es)........................................................................................
 ..........................................................................................................................................................................................
 6. Amount of each raw material used yearly (kg)..................................................................................................................
 ..........................................................................................................................................................................................
 7. Name(s) and types of products..........................................................................................................................................
 ..........................................................................................................................................................................................
 8. Sources of air emissions....................................................................................................................................................
 ..........................................................................................................................................................................................
 9. Name(s) and type(s) of air pollutants................................................................................................................................
 ..........................................................................................................................................................................................
 ..........................................................................................................................................................................................
10. Rate of emission of each air pollutant discharged into the ambient air (kg/h. ton/yr)
 ..........................................................................................................................................................................................
 ..........................................................................................................................................................................................
11. Concentration of each air pollutant discharged into the ambient air (mg/m3, mg/m3, ppm etc.)......................................
 ..........................................................................................................................................................................................
 ..........................................................................................................................................................................................
12. Energy source used (e.g. coal, diesel etc.)........................................................................................................................
 ..........................................................................................................................................................................................
 ..........................................................................................................................................................................................
13. Amount of each energy source used yearly (kg)..............................................................................................................
 ..........................................................................................................................................................................................
 ..........................................................................................................................................................................................
14. Amount of each energy source used per day (kg)............................................................................................................
 ..........................................................................................................................................................................................
 ..........................................................................................................................................................................................
15. Type of production operation (continuous or intermittent)................................................................................................
 ..........................................................................................................................................................................................
16. Total number of hours of operation (per day, per week, per month, per year)
 ..........................................................................................................................................................................................
17. Number of stacks in operation..........................................................................................................................................
18. Physical stack height for each (m)....................................................................................................................................
19. Stack gas volume for each (m3/s. m3/h)..........................................................................................................................
The Laws of Zambia
Copyright Ministry of Legal Affairs, Government of the Republic of Zambia
The Laws of Zambia
Copyright Ministry of Legal Affairs, Government of the Republic of Zambia
FORM AP4
REPUBLIC OF ZAMBIA
ENVIRONMENTAL COUNCIL
THE AIR POLLUTION CONTROL (LICENSING AND EMISSION STANDARDS)
REGULATIONS, 1996
PERMIT TO EMIT AIR POLLUTANTS
(Regulation 11)
(To be completed in triplicate)
Permit No. ..................................................................................................................................................................................
Name: ........................................................................................................................................................................................
Address: ......................................................................................................................................................................................
You are hereby permitted to discharge emissions into the ambient air at (location)
....................................................................................................................................................................................................
....................................................................................................................................................................................................
....................................................................................................................................................................................................
The permit is valid from...........................................................to..................................................................................................
The permit is subject to the attached conditions and intermediate emission limits.
Date: ..........................................................................................
....................................................................................................
Chief Inspector (Pollution Control) Environmental Council of
Zambia Inspectorate
The Laws of Zambia
Copyright Ministry of Legal Affairs, Government of the Republic of Zambia
FORM AP5
REPUBLIC OF ZAMBIA
PRESCRIBED FORMS
ENVIRONMENTAL COUNCIL
THE AIR CONTROL (LICENSING AND EMISSION STANDARDS)
REGULATIONS, 1996
APPLICATION FOR LICENCE FOR NEW SOURCES OF AIR EMISSIONS
(Regulation 7)
The Laws of Zambia
Copyright Ministry of Legal Affairs, Government of the Republic of Zambia
(To be completed in triplicate)
To: The Chief Inspector (Pollution Control)
Environmental Council of Zambia
P.O. Box 35131
Lusaka
 1. Name and address of applicant:........................................................................................................................................
 ..........................................................................................................................................................................................
 ........................................Tel:..........................................Fax:............................................................................................
 2. Location of plant/activity....................................................................................................................................................
 ..........................................................................................................................................................................................
 3. Type(s) of activity (e.g. copper mining, cement manufacture etc.)....................................................................................
 ..........................................................................................................................................................................................
 4. Name(s) of department(s) section(s) unit(s) where air emission occur............................................................................
 ..........................................................................................................................................................................................
 5. Name(s) and type(s) of raw materials used in the process(es)........................................................................................
 ..........................................................................................................................................................................................
 6. Amount of each raw material used yearly (kg)..................................................................................................................
 ..........................................................................................................................................................................................
 7. Name(s) and types of products..........................................................................................................................................
 ..........................................................................................................................................................................................
 8. Sources of air emissions....................................................................................................................................................
 ..........................................................................................................................................................................................
 9. Name(s) and type(s) of air pollutants................................................................................................................................
 ..........................................................................................................................................................................................
 ..........................................................................................................................................................................................
10. Rate of emission of each air pollutant discharged into the ambient air (kg/h. ton/yr)
 ..........................................................................................................................................................................................
 ..........................................................................................................................................................................................
11. Concentration of each air pollutant discharged into the ambient air (mg/m3, mg/m3, ppm etc.)......................................
 ..........................................................................................................................................................................................
 ..........................................................................................................................................................................................
12. Energy source used (e.g. coal, diesel etc.)........................................................................................................................
 ..........................................................................................................................................................................................
 ..........................................................................................................................................................................................
13. Amount of each energy source used yearly (kg)..............................................................................................................
 ..........................................................................................................................................................................................
 ..........................................................................................................................................................................................
14. Amount of each energy source used per day (kg)............................................................................................................
 ..........................................................................................................................................................................................
 ..........................................................................................................................................................................................
15. Type of production operation (continuous or intermittent)................................................................................................
16. Total number of hours of operation (per day, per week, per month, per year)
 ..........................................................................................................................................................................................
17. Number of stacks in operation..........................................................................................................................................
18. Physical stack height for each (m)....................................................................................................................................
19. Stack gas volume for each (m3/s. m3/h)..........................................................................................................................
20. Internal stack diameter at gas exit level for each (m)........................................................................................................
The Laws of Zambia
Copyright Ministry of Legal Affairs, Government of the Republic of Zambia
The Laws of Zambia
Copyright Ministry of Legal Affairs, Government of the Republic of Zambia
FORM AP6
REPUBLIC OF ZAMBIA
ENVIRONMENTAL COUNCIL
THE AIR POLLUTION CONTROL (LICENSING AND EMISSION STANDARDS)
REGULATIONS, 1996
LICENCE FOR NEW SOURCES OF AIR EMISSION
(Regulation 8)
(To be completed in triplicate)
Licence No. ................................................................................................................................................................................
Name: ........................................................................................................................................................................................
Address: ......................................................................................................................................................................................
You are hereby licenced to discharge emissions from your new sources of emissions into the ambient air at
(location)......................................................................................................................................................................................
....................................................................................................................................................................................................
....................................................................................................................................................................................................
....................................................................................................................................................................................................
The licence is valid from............................................to..............................................................................................................
The licence is subject to the conditions and long-term emission limits set out in these Regulations and such other
conditions the inspectorate may determine.
Condition......................................................................................................................................................................................
....................................................................................................................................................................................................
....................................................................................................................................................................................................
Date: ..........................................................................................
....................................................................................................
Chief Inspector (Pollution Control)
Environmental Council of Zambia
Inspectorate
The Laws of Zambia
Copyright Ministry of Legal Affairs, Government of the Republic of Zambia
THIRD SCHEDULE
(Regulation 4)
TABLE OF LONG-TERM EMISSION LIMITS FOR AIR POLLUTIONS BY TYPE OF
INDUSTRY/PROCESS
The Laws of Zambia
Copyright Ministry of Legal Affairs, Government of the Republic of Zambia
Industry/Process Parameter Long-Term Emission
 Limit
A. COPPER PRODUCTION
1. Smelters and Converters Sulphur dioxide (SO2) 1000 mg/Nm3
 dust 50 mg/Nm3
2. Coal preparation dust 50 mg/Nm3
3. Concrete dryer dust 50 mg/Nm3
 (SO2) 500 mg/Nm3
4. Heavy metal content arsenic (As) 0.5 mg/Nm3
 in dust cadmium (Cd) 0.05 mg/Nm3
 copper (Cu) 1.0 mg/Nm3
 lead (Pb) 0.2 mg/Nm3
 mercury (Hg) 0.05 mg/Nm3
B. CEMENT AND LIME PRODUCTION
1. Cement production dust 50 mg/Nm3
2. Lime production dust 50 mg/Nm3
C. NITRIC ACID AND SULPHURIC ACID PRODUCTION
1. Nitric acid production NOx as (NO2) 100-1,400 kg/day
2. Sulphuric acid production (SO2) 700-4,300 kg/day
D. FERTILISER PRODUCTION
1. Ammonium nitrate production dust 500 kg/day
2. Coal treatment dust 150 kg/day
3. NPK production dust 100 kg/day
E. COMBUSTION UNITS
1. Oil fire, <50 [MW (2)] dust 50-150 mg/Nm(3)
 (SO2) 850 mg/Nm3
 (CO2) 100 mg/Nm3
2. Coal fired, <10 [MW (2)] dust 150 mg/Nm3
 (SO2) 2000 mg/Nm3
3. Oil fired, <10-50 [MW (2)] dust 50 mg/Nm3
 (SO2) 1000 mg/Nm3
 CO 175 mg/Nm3
F. OTHER PROCESS
NOTES
1. The limits are normalised to 273K, 101.3 Pa and 3 Vol,-% (O2)
2. The limits are normalised to 273K, 101.3 Pa and 7 Vol,-% (O2)
3. More strict limits for light oil, less strict for heavy oil. Smaller combustion units need limits less strict than larger units.
For this reason the Inspectorate will prescribe limits based on this range on a case to case basis.
4. CO limits are not necessary for oil combustion units <5 MV and coal combustion units <1 MW.
The Laws of Zambia
Copyright Ministry of Legal Affairs, Government of the Republic of Zambia
FOURTH SCHEDULE
(Regulations 5, 8 and 10)
FEES
 Fee units
Application for permit or licence to emit air pollutants for activities:
CLASS III (High Polluters) 25,000
CLASS III (Moderate Polluters) 16,667
CLASS III (Relatively Low Polluters) 8,333
CLASS IV (Low Polluters) 556
SECTIONS 6 AND 96-THE ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AND POLLUTION CONTROL
(ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT) REGULATIONS
Regulations by the Minister
Statutory Instrument
28 of 1997
PART I PRELIMINARYPART I
PRELIMINARY
1. These Regulations may be cited as the Environmental Protection and Pollution
Control (Environmental Impact Assessment) Regulations.
Title
2. In these Regulations, unless the context otherwise requires- Interpretation
"authorising agency" means any Government ministry or department, public
corporation, local authority or public officer in which, or in whom, any law,
regulation or by-law vests the powers and functions to authorise, control or
manage any aspect of a proposed or existing project;
"Council" means the Environmental Council of Zambia established by section three
of the Act or any agent of the Council who has been duly authorised by the
Council for purposes of these regulations;
"day" means an official working day;
"decision letter" means a letter issued by the Council stating that a proposed
project is not likely to cause unacceptable environmental impacts or that the
expected environmental impacts are unacceptable and an authorisation
licence, a permit or permission should not be issued;
The Laws of Zambia
Copyright Ministry of Legal Affairs, Government of the Republic of Zambia
"developer" means any person who, or entity which, proposes to undertake a new
project or to repair or extend an existing project which falls within the list of
projects provided for in the First Schedule and who, or which, is responsible
for obtaining the appropriate authorisation;
"Director" means the Director appointed under section fifteen of the Act or any
other person who has been authorised by the Director to act on his behalf;
"environment" has the meaning assigned to it in section two of the Act;
"environmental impact assessment" means a systematic examination conducted to
determine whether or not a proposed project, or alteration to an existing
project, or alternatives, may have significant adverse or beneficial impacts
on the environment;
"environmental impact statement" means the statement described in regulation 8,
11, 12 and 13;
"environmental mitigation audit" means the systematic, documented, periodic and
objective evaluation of the implementation and performance of the impact
management plan included in an environmental impact statement and as
included in any authorisation licence, permit or permission pertaining to a
proposed project or alteration of an existing project;
"individual person" means the human person;
"inspector" means Inspector appointed under section eighty-one of the Act;
"mass media" includes publicly exhibited posters, newspapers, radio, television or
other electronic media used for public communication;
"mitigation measures" includes engineering works, technological improvements,
management measures and other ways and means of preventing,
ameliorating or compensating for adverse environmental impacts and
losses suffered by individuals and communities and for enhancing benefits;
"project" means any plan, operation, undertaking, develop-ment, change in the use
of land, or extensions and other alterations to any of the above and which
cannot be implemented without an authorisation licence, permit or
permission from an authorising agency or without approval from a line
ministry before entry into a project implementation programme;
"project brief" means a report made by the developer including preliminary
predictions of possible impacts of a proposed project on the environment
and constituting the first stage in the environmental impact assessment
process; and 
The Laws of Zambia
Copyright Ministry of Legal Affairs, Government of the Republic of Zambia
"proprietary information" means information relating to any manufacturing process,
trade secret, trademark, patent, copyright, breeder's right, or formula
protected by law or by any international treaty to which Zambia is a party.
PART II PROJECT BRIEFSPART II
PROJECT BRIEFS
3. (1) A developer shall not implement a project for which a project brief or an
environmental impact statement is required under these Regulations, unless the project
brief or the environmental impact statement has been concluded in accordance with these
regulations and the Council has issued a decision letter.
Project brief and
environmental impact
statement
(2) The requirement for a project brief applies to-
(a) a developer of any project set out in the First Schedule whether or not the
developer is part of a previously approved project;
(b) any alterations or extensions of any existing project which is set out in the
First Schedule; or
(c) any project which is not specified in the First Schedule, but for which the
Council determines a project brief should be prepared.
The Laws of Zambia
Copyright Ministry of Legal Affairs, Government of the Republic of Zambia
4. A developer shall prepare a project brief under regulation 3, stating in a concise
manner-
(a) the site description of the environment;
(b) the objectives and nature of the project and reasonable alternatives;
(c) the main activities that will be undertaken during site preparation, and
construction and after the development is operational;
(d) the raw and other materials that the project will use;
(e) the products and by-products, including solid, liquid and gaseous waste
generation;
(f) the noise level, heat and radioactive emissions, from normal and
emergency operations;
(g) the expected socio-economic impact of the project and the number of
people that the project will resettle or employ, directly, during construction
and operation;
(h) the expected environmental impact of the project, taking into account the
provisions of paragraphs (c) to (g);
(i) the expected effect on the bio-diversity, natural lands and geographical
resources and the area of land and water that may be affected through time
and space; and
(j) a description of adverse mitigation measures and any monitoring
programmes to be implemented.
Preparation of project
brief
5. (1) A developer shall submit six copies of the project brief to the Council. Submission of project
brief to Council
(2) If the Council considers the project brief to be complete, the Council shall
transmit the project brief to the authorising agency for comments within seven days of
receiving the project brief.
(3) The authorising agency referred to in sub-regulation (2) shall make comments
and transmit them to the Council within thirty days of receiving the project brief.
(4) Where the agency fails to make comments or transmit the project brief to the
Council within the period specified in sub-regulation (2), the Council shall proceed to
consider that project brief.
6. (1) The Council shall consider the project brief and the comments received. Consideration of
project brief and
decision by Council
(2) If the Council is satisfied that the project will have no significant impact on the
environment, or that the project brief discloses sufficient mitigation measures to ensure
the acceptability of the anticipated impacts, the Council shall within forty days of receiving
the project brief from the developer, issue a decision letter, with conditions as appropriate,
to that effect, to the authorising agency.
The Laws of Zambia
Copyright Ministry of Legal Affairs, Government of the Republic of Zambia
PART III ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT STATEMENTPART III
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT STATEMENT
7. (1) Where the Council determines that the project is likely to have a significant
impact on the environment, it shall require that an environmental impact statement be
prepared in accordance with these Regulations, and shall inform the developer
accordingly within forty days of receiving the project brief from the developer.
Decision that an
environmental impact
statement be prepared
(2) A requirement for an environmental impact statement under regulation (1) shall
apply to-
(a) a developer of any project specified in the Second Schedule regardless of
whether the developer is part of a previously approved project;
(b) any alterations or extensions of any existing project which is specified in the
Second Schedule; or
(c) any project which is not specified in the Second Schedule, but for which the
Council determines that an environmental impact statement should be
prepared.
8. (1) An environmental impact statement shall be prepared and paid for by the
developer in accordance with the terms of reference prepared by the developer in
consultation with the Council.
Terms of reference
(2) To ensure that public views are taken into account during the preparation of the
terms of reference, the developer shall organise a public consultation process, involving
Government agencies, local authorities, non-governmental and community-based
organisations and interested and affected parties, to help determine the scope of the work
to be done in the conduct of the environmental impact assessment and in the preparation
of the environmental impact statement.
(3) The developer shall prepare draft terms of reference taking into account the
issues contained in the Third Schedule and the results of the consultations undertaken
under sub-regulation (2) and submit these to the Council for approval.
(4) On receipt of the draft terms of reference, the Council shall determine, within a
period of five days from receipt of the draft, whether the terms of reference are acceptable
and if the terms of reference are unacceptable, the developer shall, with the assistance of
the Council, prepare the final terms of reference.
The Laws of Zambia
Copyright Ministry of Legal Affairs, Government of the Republic of Zambia
(5) A developer shall not begin work on preparing the environmental impact
statement until the Council has approved the terms of reference.
(6) The terms of reference shall include a direction that those responsible for
preparing the environmental impact statement provide information on all matters specified
in regulation 11 together with such other matters as are considered necessary by the
Council.
9. (1) The developer shall, upon the approval of the terms of reference for an
environmental impact statement under regulation 8, submit to the Council the names and
qualifications of the persons that shall prepare the environmental impact statement.
Approval of persons
preparing
environmental impact
statement and conduct
of environmental
impact assessment
(2) The Council may approve or reject the name of any person submitted to it under
sub-regulation (1).
(3) Where the Council rejects the name referred to in sub-regulation (2), it shall state
the reasons for the rejection and request that another name be submitted within such
period as it shall specify.
(4) Subject to the other provisions of these Regulations, the developer shall conduct
the environmental impact assessment in accordance with the guidelines, which are set out
in the Fourth Schedule, and any other guidelines, as the Council considers appropriate for
the project.
10. (1) The developer shall, prior to the submission of the environmental impact
statement to the Council, take all measures necessary to seek the views of the people in
the community which will be affected by the project.
Public consultations
(2) In seeking the views of the community in accordance with sub-regulation (1), the
developer shall-
(a) publicise the intended project, its effects and benefits, in the mass media, in
a language understood by the community, for a period of not less than
fifteen days and subsequently at regular intervals throughout the process;
and
(b) after the expiration of the period of fifteen days, referred to in paragraph (a),
hold meetings with the affected community in order to present information
on the project and obtain the views of those consulted.
The Laws of Zambia
Copyright Ministry of Legal Affairs, Government of the Republic of Zambia
11. Without prejudice to the generality of the issues contained in the terms of
reference as set out in the Third Schedule, the environmental impact statement shall
include-
(a) a description of the project, and reasonable alternatives, which may begin
or increase operations to provide materials or services to the proposed
project;
(b) a description of the proposed site and reasons for rejecting other alternative
sites;
(c) a brief description of the site and the surrounding environment specifying
any information necessary to identify and assess the environmental effects
of the project;
(d) a description of the raw material inputs into the project and their potential
environmental effects;
(e) a description of the technology and processes that shall be used;
(f) a description of the products and by-products of the project;
(g) the environmental effects of the project, and reasonable alternatives,
including the direct, indirect, or cumulative, short-term and long-term
effects;
(h) the socio-economic impacts of the project, such as resettlement of affected
people;
(i) an impact management plan containing a description of measures
proposed for preventing, minimising or compensating for any adverse
impact, and enhancing beneficial effects, and measures to monitor effluent
streams or important environmental features that may be affected by the
project; and
(j) an indication of whether the environment of any neighbouring state is likely
to be affected.
Contents of
environmental impact
statement
12. An environmental impact statement shall contain an executive summary,
stating the main findings and recommendations, and shall be signed by every individual
person involved in its preparation.
Executive summary
and signatures
13. (1) The Council shall transmit a copy of an environmental impact statement to
the neighbouring state, through the appropriate Ministry, whose environment may be
affected, with a request for comments to be received within a specified period.
Transmission of
environmental impact
statement to
neighbouring state and
review of comments
(2) The Council shall consider comments received under sub-regulation (1) and,
state the review process of an environmental impact statement
PART IV REVIEW PROCESS OF ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT STATEMENTPART IV
REVIEW PROCESS OF ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT STATEMENT
The Laws of Zambia
Copyright Ministry of Legal Affairs, Government of the Republic of Zambia
14. (1) The developer shall submit twelve copies of an environmental impact
statement to the Council.
Submission of
environmental impact
statement
(2) The Director shall enter the environmental impact statement, submitted under
sub-regulation (1), in a Register of environmental impact statements.
15. (1) The Council shall, within seven days of receipt of the environmental impact
statement, transmit a single copy of the statement to the authorising agency for
comments.
Comments of the
agency
(2) An authorising agency shall, within thirty days of receiving the environmental
impact statement make comments on the statement and transmit them to the Council.
(3) An authorising agency may, in considering the environmental impact statement
under this Regulation, carry out such other procedures as it may be considered
appropriate.
16. (1) The Council shall- Public consultations
(a) distribute copies of an environmental impact statement to relevant
ministries, local government units, parastals, non-governmental and
community-based organisations, interested and affected parties;
(b) place copies of an environmental impact statement in public buildings in the
vicinity of the site of the proposed project; and
(c) place a notification in at least two national newspapers three times a week
for two consecutive weeks, and broadcast a notification on national radio,
detailing the place and time where copies of an environmental impact
statement are available for inspection and the procedures for submitting
comments.
(2) The Council may organise, or cause to be organised, public meetings in the
locality of the proposed project.
(3) Any person wishing to make a comment on any copy of an environmental impact
statement shall send comments to the Council, within twenty days from the date of the last
notification issued in accordance with paragraph (c) of sub-regulation (1).
(4) The Council may extend the period for receipt of written comments up to a
maximum of fifteen days, if the Council considers that-
The Laws of Zambia
Copyright Ministry of Legal Affairs, Government of the Republic of Zambia
(a) many contentious issues have arisen indicating the sensitive nature of the
project; or
(b) the remoteness of the project location causes logistical problems for the
consultation process.
17. (1) The Council shall consider an environmental impact statement and all the
comments received under regulations 15 and 16 to determine whether to issue a decision
letter in accordance with regulation 21 or hold a public hearing in accordance with
sub-regulation (2).
Decision to hold a
public hearing
(2) Te Council shall hold a public hearing on the environmental impact statement if-
(a) as a result of the comments made under regulations 15 and 16, the Council
is of the opinion that a public hearing shall enable it to make a fair and just
decision; or
(b) the Council considers it necessary for the protection of the environment.
18. (1) Whenever a public hearing is to be conducted under these Regulations- Public hearing
(a) a notice of the hearing shall be published three times a week for two
consecutive weeks in national papers at least fifteen days prior to the public
hearing; and all expenses of the notices shall be incurred by the project
proponent;
(b) all documents shall, from the end of the period of the public review until the
end of the public hearing remain available for public inspection
accompanied by all written comments at the location specified under
regulation 16;
(c) such hearing shall begin not later than twenty-five days after the last public
notification:
 Provided that if the Council determines that the number and complexity
of the issues, to be considered at a hearing, require additional preparation
time, on the part of those wishing to make a presentation to the hearing, it
may extend this period up to maximum of ten days;
(d) the Council shall, where it feels, necessary and appropriate request any
relevant persons to be present at the public hearing to make comments or
solicit, in writing, for comments from other Government agencies which
have expertise or regulatory power over the proposed project, as well as
from the authorising agency.
The Laws of Zambia
Copyright Ministry of Legal Affairs, Government of the Republic of Zambia
(2) The Council shall appoint a person who, in its opinion, is suitable qualified to
preside over the public hearing and who shall serve on such terms and conditions as may
be agreed between the Council and the person so appointed.
(3) A public hearing shall be conducted at a venue which shall be convenient and
accessible to those persons who are likely to be specifically affected by the project.
(4) On the conclusion of a public hearing the person presiding at the hearing shall,
within fifteen days from the termination of the public hearing, make a report of his findings
to the Council.
19. (1) Any person may attend a public hearing, either in person or through a
representative, and make presentations:
Persons eligible to
participate in a public
hearing
Provided that the person presiding at the public hearing shall have the right to
disallow frivolous and vexatious presentations which lead to the abuse of the process.
(2) The Council shall determine the procedure for making presentations at a public
hearing.
PART V DECISION OF THE COUNCILPART V
DECISION OF THE COUNCIL
20. (1) In making a decision regarding an environmental impact statement under
these Regulations, the Council shall take into accountCriteria for decisions
(a) the impact predictions made in the environmental impact statement;
(b) the comments made under regulations 15 and 16;
(c) the report of the person presiding at a public hearing, where applicable; and
(d) other factors which the Council considers crucial in the particular
circumstances of the project.
(2) The Council shall make its decision in accordance with regulation 21, within thirty
days after receipt of a report from a public hearing or twenty days from the date on which
an environmental impact statement was submitted under regulation 14.
The Laws of Zambia
Copyright Ministry of Legal Affairs, Government of the Republic of Zambia
21. The Council shall take into account the whole review process and issue a
decision letter stating thatDecisions of Council
and issues of decision
letter
(a) the project is approved;
(b) the project is rejected; or
(c) the project is approved subject to the developer meeting certain conditions.
22. (1) In issuing its decision letter the Council shall, as the case may be- Reasons and
conditions of decision
(a) provide reasons for any rejection; or
(b) specify the conditions to be attached, as an Annex to any authorisation
licence, permit or permission issued to the developer based on an impact
management plan provided in an environmental impact statement; including
an activity schedule to govern implementation of the conditions.
(2) An Annex containing any specified condition shall be signed by the Director
23. A decision of the Council under this Part shall be communicated to all parties
concerned, within fifteen days of the decision.
Communication of
decision
24. (1) If any party concerned is aggrieved by a decision of the Council, that party
may, in writing, appeal to the Minister against the decision of the Council within a period of
ten days after receipt of the decision letter from the Council.
Appeals
(2) The Minister shall render his decision within fourteen days of receiving an appeal.
(3) If the aggrieved party is not content with a decision, of the Minister he may
appeal to the High Court.
25. An authorisation licence, permit or permission, that has been issued, following
preparation of an environmental impact statement, shall not be valid unless it has an
Annex signed by the Director stipulating the conditions to be implemented.
Validity of
authorisation
document
The Laws of Zambia
Copyright Ministry of Legal Affairs, Government of the Republic of Zambia
PART VI ACCESS TO ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT STATEMENTS AND
INFORMATIONPART VI
ACCESS TO ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT STATEMENTS AND INFORMATION
26. (1) Any project brief, environmental impact statement, terms of reference, public
comments, report of a person presiding at a public hearing, decision letter or any other
information submitted to the Council under these Regulations, shall be public documents.
Documents to be
public
(2) The Council shall, on such terms and conditions as it may determine, grant any
person who desires to consult any document, referred to in sub-regulation (1), access to
that document
27. (1) Where at any stage during the process of implementing these Regulations,
the developer claims, in writing, that any information submitted to the Council is
proprietaryProtection of
proprietary information
(a) the Council shall review the claim and may request the developer to submit
such additional information as it considers necessary to support such claim;
and
(b) no person shall copy, circulate, publish or disclose such information until
the Council makes a decision on the claim.
(2) The Council shall decide within twenty days of the making of the claim under
sub-regulation (1), whether to treat the information as proprietary or not.
(3) Where the Council determines that the information referred to in sub-regulation
(1) is proprietary, such information shall be excluded from the project brief or the
environmental impact statement, but such information shall remain available to the
Council.
(4) Any member of staff of the Council who is handling any information which the
Council has determined to be proprietary, shall not disclose or communicate such
information to any unauthorised person.
(5) Where the Council rejects a claim that any information is proprietary, the Council
shall request the developer to communicate, in writing, to the Council, where the
developer intends to-
(a) waive the claim and continue with the assessment process under these
Regulations; or
The Laws of Zambia
Copyright Ministry of Legal Affairs, Government of the Republic of Zambia
(b) withdraw the information submitted under these Regulations from the
assessment process.
PART VII POST-ASSESSMENT ENVIRONMENTAL AUDITSPART VII
POST-ASSESSMENT ENVIRONMENTAL AUDITS
28. (1) In executing a project, the developer shall take all practicable measures to
ensure that all conditions attached to an authorisation document are complied with.
Preparation of an
environmental audit
(2) Subject to sub-regulation 3, the developer shall undertake an environmental audit
of the project within a period of not less than twelve months and not more than thirty-six
months after the completion of the project or the commencement of its operations,
whichever is the earlier.
(3) Notwithstanding sub-regulation (2), the Council may ask the developer to
undertake an environmental audit at any time for short term spraying or any other
purpose.
(4) The environmental audit undertaken under sub-regulation (2) shall be carried out
by at least two appropriately qualified persons from those who prepared the environmental
impact statement and where this is not possible, by persons whose names and
qualifications have been approved by the Council for that purpose.
(5) The audit referred to in sub-regulation (2) shall focus on the implementation of
the conditions attached to an authorisation document and shall include conclusions on the
extent to which-
(a) the measures specified in the conditions have been implemented according
to the activity schedule; and
(b) the measures are achieving the expected results and, where deficiencies
exist, suggest measures to deal with them.
(6) The Council may, after the environmental audit referred to in sub-regulation (2),
require the developer to carry out specified remedial actions and further audits at such
times as the Council may consider necessary.
(7) An environmental audit report shall be prepared after each audit and shall be
submitted to the Council by the developer within such time as the Council may determine.
The Laws of Zambia
Copyright Ministry of Legal Affairs, Government of the Republic of Zambia
29. (1) An inspector appointed under the Act may at all reasonable times enter
upon any land, premises or other facility related to a project for which a project brief or an
environmental impact statement has been made under these Regulations to undertake
investigations relating to the implementation of any condition or measures to be taken
following an environmental audit.
Role of inspector
(2) An inspector acting under this Regulation may examine and copy any record and
exercise all or any of the powers provided for under section eighty-four of the Act.
PART VIII PERIOD OF VALIDITYPART VIII
PERIOD OF VALIDITY
30. If, following the preparation of a project brief or environmental impact
assessment, an authorisation licence, a permit or permission has been issued but no land
preparation or construction work has started within three years, the developer shall
re-register with the authorising agency any intention to develop.
Expiry of authorisation
document
31. A developer shall inform the authorising agency of any changes to the
development and the authorising agency shall inform the Council accordingly.
Developer to inform
authorising agent of
changes
32. (1) The Council shall decide whether- Need for additional
environmental
information
(a) an additional environmental impact statement is required to be prepared; or
(b) any extra work is needed to be done to supplement the existing
environmental impact statement.
(2) If an additional environmental impact statement is required, a developer shall
follow the procedures set out under regulations 8 to 28.
(3) Where a supplement to the environmental impact statement is required, the
Council shall advise the developer, as to the nature of the additional information required
and the developer shall submit such information to the Council.
(4) The Council shall circulate any information for review to any relevant Government
agency and local government authority which shall send their comments to the Council
within twenty days of receipt of the information.
The Laws of Zambia
Copyright Ministry of Legal Affairs, Government of the Republic of Zambia
33. On receipt of any comment under sub-regulation (4) of regulation 32, the
Council shall issue a decision letter within ten days of the close of the period set for
receipt of comments.
Issues of decision
letter
PART IX PENALTIESPART IX
PENALTIES
34. (1) Any person who- Offences and
penalties
(a) fails to prepare and submit a project brief to the Council under regulation 3;
(b) fails to prepare and submit an environmental impact statement under
regulations 7, 11, 12 and 13;
(c) fraudulently makes a false statement in a project brief or environmental
impact statement contrary to these Regulations;
(d) fraudulently alters an environmental impact statement or project brief
contrary to these Regulations;
(e) in the development of a project, fails to abide by the conditions attached to
an authorisation permit or licence under regulation 25;
(f) fraudulently makes a false statement in an environmental audit contrary to
these Regulations; or
(g) otherwise fails to comply with these Regulations; shall be guilty of an
offence and shall be liable, upon conviction, to a fine not exceeding five
hundred and fifty-six penalty units or to imprisonment for a period not
exceeding one year or to both.
(2) A person who commits an offence under sub-regulation (1) shall, have the
authorisation, permit or licence suspended or cancelled.
35. (1) The remedial costs of any environmental damage caused through the
violation of any provision of these Regulations or any conditions or requirements made as
part of the approval of any project under these Regulations, shall be the responsibility of
the person responsible for the violation.
Remedial costs
The Laws of Zambia
Copyright Ministry of Legal Affairs, Government of the Republic of Zambia
(2) If remedial measures cannot be undertaken immediately by a developer, the
Council shall undertake the remedial measures and shall charge the costs to the
developer to pay within a specified reasonable time.
PART X MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONSPART X
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
36. The Council shall charge the fees set out in the Fifth Schedule for operational
costs in respect of reviewing project briefs, environmental impact statements, and reports
and for access to any document declared to be public documents under regulation 26.
Fees
37. The Council may delegate any of its functions under these Regulations to the
Director or any other officer of the Council, a local authority or any other appropriate
agency.
Delegation of functions
38. Where, prior to the commencement of these Regulations, an authorising
agency authorised any project to which these Regulations apply, the developer shall,
within twelve months of the commencement of these Regulations, be required to
undertake the processes prescribed under these Regulations.
Projects authorised
prior to
commencement of
these Regulations
FIRST SCHEDULE
(Regulation 3(2))
PROJECTS WHICH REQUIRE PROJECT BRIEFS
The Laws of Zambia
Copyright Ministry of Legal Affairs, Government of the Republic of Zambia
 1. Urban Development
(a) Designation of new townships which are more than 5 Ha or more or sites covering 700
dwellings and above.
(b) Establishment of industrial estates.
(c) Establishment or expansion of recreational areas such as golf courses, which would
attract 200 or more vehicles.
(d) Shopping centres and complexes-10,000 m2 and above, floor area.
 2. Transportation
(a) All major roads outside urban areas, the construction of new roads and major
improvements over 10 km in length or over 5 km in length if the road passes through a
national park or Game Management Area.
(b) Railway lines: 10 km from built up area.
(c) Airport and airfields: runway 1,800 m or more.
(d) Pipelines: for water, diameter 0.5 m and above and length 10 km outside built up area,
for oil 15 km or more of which 5 km or more of their length will be situated in a protected
area, a seriously polluted or a water abstraction area.
(e) Establishment or expansion of harbours or pontoon areas.
 3. Dams, Rivers and Water Resources
(a) Dams and barrages: covering a total of 25 Ha or more.
(b) Exploration for, and use of, ground water resources including production of geothermal
energy: water to be extracted to be more than 2 million cumecs m3/s.
(c) Water supply-reservoir surface area 50 m2 or more.
 4. Mining: Including Quarrying and Open-Cast Extraction
(a) Copper mining, coal site.
(b) Limestone, sand, dolomite, phosphate and clay extraction's of 2 Ha or more.
(c) Precious metals (silver, zinc, cobalt, nickel).
(d) Industrial metals.
(e) Gemstones
(f) Radioactive metals.
 5. Forestry Related Activities
(a) Clearance of forestry in sensitive areas such as watershed areas or for industrial use 50
Ha or more.
(b) Reforestation and afforestation.
(c) Wood processing plants-1,000 tonnes or more.
 6. Agriculture
(a) Land clearance for large scale agriculture.
(b) Introduction and use of agrochemicals new to Zambia.
(c) Introduction of new crops and animals especially exotic ones new to Zambia.
(d) Irrigation schemes covering an area of 50 Ha or more.
(e) Fish farms-production of 100 tonnes or more a year.
(f) Aerial and ground spraying-industrial scale.
 7. Processing and Manufacturing Industry
(a) Cement works and lime processing-1,000 tonnes or more a year.
(b) Fertilizer manufacturing or processing-1,000 tonnes or more a year.
(c) Tanning and dressing of hides and skins-1,000 skins a week.
(d) Abattoirs and meat processing plants-20,000 carcasses and above a month.
The Laws of Zambia
Copyright Ministry of Legal Affairs, Government of the Republic of Zambia
SECOND SCHEDULE
(Regulation 7(2))
PROJECTS WHICH REQUIRE ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT
The Laws of Zambia
Copyright Ministry of Legal Affairs, Government of the Republic of Zambia
11. Projects
(a) Urban area rehabilitation.
(b) Water transport.
(c) Flood control schemes.
(d) Exploration for, and production of, hydrocarbons including refining and transport.
(e) Timber harvesting and processing in forestry.
(f) Land consolidation schemes.
(g) Mining, and mineral processing, reduction of ores, minerals, cement and lime kilns.
(h) Smelting and refining of ores and minerals.
(i) Foundries.
(j) Brick and earthen manufacture.
(k) Glass works.
(l) Breweries and malting plants.
(m) Plants for the manufacture of coal briquettes.
(n) Pumped storage schemes.
(o) Bulk grain processing plants.
(p) Hydro power schemes and electrification.
(q) Chemical processing and manufacturing.
12. Others
(a) Resettlement schemes.
(b) Storage of hydrocarbons
(c) Hospitals, clinics and health centres.
(d) Cemetery designation.
(e) Tourism and recreational development in national parks or similar reserves.
(f) Projects located in or near environmental sensitive areas such as-
 (i) indigenous forests;
 (ii) wetlands;
 (iii) zones of high biological diversity;
 (iv) areas supporting populations of rare and endangered species;
 (v) zones prone to erosion or desertification;
 (vi) areas of historical and archaeological interest;
 (vii) areas of cultural or religious significance;
 (viii) areas used extensively for recreation and aesthetic reasons;
 (ix) areas prone to flooding and natural hazards;
 (x) water catchments containing major sources for public, industrial or agricultural uses; and
 (xi) areas of human settlements (particularly those with schools and hospitals).
THIRD SCHEDULE
(Regulation 8(3))
ISSUES TO BE CONSIDERED IN PREPARING THE TERMS OF REFERENCE
The Laws of Zambia
Copyright Ministry of Legal Affairs, Government of the Republic of Zambia
The following impacts and issues may, among others, be considered for inclusion, as
appropriate, in the preparation of the terms of reference.
1. Ecological consideration, including:
(a) Biological diversity
 (i) Effect on number, diversity, breeding sites etc. of flora and fauna.
 (ii) Effect on the gene pools of domesticated and wild sustainable yield.
(b) Sustainable use including:
 (i) Effect of soil fertility;
 (ii) Breeding populations of fish and game; and
 (iii) Natural regeneration of woodland and sustainable yield.
(c) Ecosystem maintenance including:
 (i) Effects of proposal on food chains;
 (ii) Nutrient cycles;
 (iii) Aquifer recharge, water run-off rates etc.;
 (iv) Aerial extent of habitats; and
 (v) Biogeographical processes.
2. Social, economic and cultural considerations including:
(i) Effects of generation or reduction of employment in the area;
(ii) Social cohesion or disruption (resettlement);
(iii) Immigration (including induced development when people are attracted to a development
site because of possible enhanced economic opportunities);
(iv) Communication-roads opened up, closed, re-routed; and
(v) Local economic impacts.
3. Land Scape
(i) Views opened up or closed.
(ii) Visual impacts (features, removal of vegetation, etc.).
(iii) Compatibility with surrounding areas.
(iv) Amenity opened up or closed e.g. recreation facilities.
4. Land Use
(i) Effects on land uses and land potential in the project area and in the surrounding areas.
(ii) Possibility of multiple use.
5. Water
(i) Effects on surface water quality and quantity.
(ii) Effects on underground water quality and quantity.
(iii) Effect on the flow regime the water course.
6. Air Quality
(i) Effects on the quality of the ambient air of the area.
(ii) Type and amount of possible emissions (pollutants).
FOURTH SCHEDULE
(Regulation 9(4))
The Laws of Zambia
Copyright Ministry of Legal Affairs, Government of the Republic of Zambia
GUIDELINES FOR DEVELOPERS IN CONDUCTING ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT
STAGE 1: PRELIMINARY ACTIONS
(1) The description of the project which is done in the project brief submitted to the Council
under regulation 5.
(2) The developer appoints a co-ordinator for the environmental impact study. The qualification
of the co-ordinator depend on the nature of the project.
(3) Together with the co-ordinator the developer selects the experts that will comprise the team
that will undertake the study. Preference should be given to experts with specific knowledge of local
or similar conditions. The team shall include at least one person resident in the potentially affected
area.
(4) The co-ordinator allocates work to the team member of the purpose of carrying out the
scoping exercise.
(5) The team reviews and determines the applicable laws, regulations and standards.
(6) The developer, the co-ordinator and the team identify the various alternatives for the
development of the project (sites, technology and design).
STAGE 2: SCOPING (OR IDENTIFICATION OF IMPACTS)
(1) The team under the guidance of the co-ordinator identifies all the possible environmental
impacts of the project.
(2) The co-ordinator, the team and the Council determines which of the impacts shall be the
subject of the study based on the following criteria:
(a) magnitude, including the impact of the project on environmental resources;
(b) extent, including the geographical extent of the impact;
(c) significance, including the actual effects of the impacts on the environmental resource;
and
(d) special sensitivity, including impacts which are significant in the specific local economic,
social and ecological setting (see Regulation 8).
(3) The developer submits the names and qualifications of all persons to carry out the study to
the Council for approval.
STAGE 3: BASELINE STUDY
The team undertakes a detailed description of the existing environment including the social and
economic activities of the population resident in the potentially affected area.
STAGE 4: IMPACT EVALUATION
The team predicts and evaluates the various predicted impacts and ranks them in order of
importance on the basis of two criteria:
(1) Quantitative change where change can be quantified.
(2) Qualitative change where change cannot be quantified, but instead the impact of the
project depends on the environmental acceptability of the project.
The Laws of Zambia
Copyright Ministry of Legal Affairs, Government of the Republic of Zambia
STAGE 5: PUBLIC PARTICIPATION IN ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT STUDY
(1) The team seeks the view of the communities which are likely to be affected by the project.
(2) The views sought in (1) are considered in the development of mitigation measures
(regulation 11).
STAGE 6: IDENTIFICATION OF MITIGATION MEASURES
(1) The team identifies measures for the elimination (where possible), or reduction, of
environmental impact for the various alternatives identified in the study such as:
(a) engineering works in noise reduction, prior treatment of effluent air pollution reduction
measures and solid waste minimisation through reclamation, recycling and any other
appropriate measures.
(b) management measures especially in the areas of natural resources, reforestation, control
of soil erosion, desalinisation, desilting.
(2) The team includes the cost mitigation measures into the impact evaluation.
(3) Where necessary the team will create a new alternative based on the mitigation.
STAGE 7: ASSESSMENT (OR COMPARISON OF ALTERNATIVES)
(1) The team compares all alternatives on the basis of economic, socio-cultural and
environmental gains and costs.
(2) The team ranks and recommends the various alternatives to the developer on the basis of
sound environmental and economic analysis.
STAGE 8: DECISION MAKING BY THE DEVELOPER
The developer makes a decision choosing one alternative and giving reasons for the rejecting
of other alternatives.
STAGE 9: SUBMISSION OF THE REPORT TO COUNCIL
(1) The team completes the environmental impact statement (see regulations 11 and 12).
(2) The developer submits the report to the Council.
STAGE 10: IMPLEMENTATION OF THE PROJECT AND POST ASSESSMENT AUDITS
(1) If the Council approves the environmental impact statement (under regulation 21) the
developer may implement the project.
(2) The team shall carry out a post assessment environmental audit between 12-36 months of
the commencement of the project (see regulation 28).
The Laws of Zambia
Copyright Ministry of Legal Affairs, Government of the Republic of Zambia
FIFTH SCHEDULE
(Regulation 36)
FEES
Based on operational experience and costs, fees shall be determined according to the amount
of work, project and service done by the Council such as-
(1) Review of project briefs (regulation 5) 100,000.00 kwacha.
(2) Review of environmental impact statements (regulation 13) five percent of total cost of
implementing the project.
(3) Search fee for access to information on environmental impact statements (regulation 26)
50,000.00 kwacha.