CHAPTER I - GENERAL PROVISIONS

Short Title
(1) This Proclamation may be cited as "The Eritrean Environment Protection, Management and Rehabilitation Framework Proclamation No. 179/2017".

Definitions
(2) In this proclamation, unless the context requires otherwise: [1] "Biological Diversity/Biodiversity" means the variability among living organisms from all sources including terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems and the ecological habitats of which they are part and includes diversity within and between genetic species and ecosystems. [2] "Bio safety" is a term used to describe efforts to reduce or eliminate the potential risk to environment and human health resulting from the application of biotechnology (any technique that uses living organisms or substances to make or modify plants and animals or to develop microorganisms for specific uses). [3] "Chemical" means a chemical substance in any form, whether by itself or in a mixture or preparation, whether manufactured or derived from nature and for the purposes of this Proclamation includes industrial chemicals, pesticides, fertilizers and drugs. [4] "Competent authority" means any government body with defined mandate in an area of concern. [5] "Council" means the National Environmental Council (NEC) established under this Proclamation. [6] "Department" means the Department of Environment within the Ministry. [7] "Director General" means the Director General of the Department of Environment. [8] "Ecosystem" means a dynamic complex of plants, animals and micro-organism communities and their non-living environment interacting as a functional unit. [9] "Environment" means the physical factors of the surroundings of human beings, including land, water, atmosphere, climate, sound, odour, taste, biological factors as well as the social factors of aesthetics that includes both natural and human built cultural, historical and economic objects. [10] "Environmental Impact Assessment" means a systematic examination of the adverse environmental, health as well as social impacts a project or activity may cause. [11] "Environmental management" includes the managerial functions that aim at the protection, conservation, rehabilitation and sustainable use of the various components of the environment. [12] "Invasive alien species" means exotic plants, animals and other organisms that have been introduced into an area outside of their normal distribution, either by accident or on purpose and which have invaded their new home threatening biological diversity, ecosystems, and human wellbeing. [13] "Ministry/Minister" means the Ministry/Minister of Land, Water and Environment. [14] "National Environmental Assessment Procedures and Guidelines" means the procedures and guidelines applied in assessing the environmental and social impacts of projects/activities. [15] "Person" means any natural or legal person. [16] "Pollution" means any direct or indirect alteration of the physical, chemical and biological properties of any element of the environment caused by discharge, emission, or deposit of substances into the environment that cause danger to the environment and\or human health. [17] "Proclamation" means this Proclamation. [18] "Sustainable development" means development that meets the needs of the present generation without compromising the ability of future generations to meet their needs by maintaining the carrying capacity of the supporting ecosystems. Accordingly, sustainable use of natural resources means the use of the same for purposes of sustainable development in a way and at a rate that does not lead to the long term decline of the natural resources including biological diversity. [19] "Waste" means any substance that may be prescribed as leftover matter, whether liquid, solid, gaseous, or radioactive, which is discharged, emitted or deposited in the environment. [20] "Zoba/Zoba Administration" means an administrative region/governorate in Eritrea.

Scope of Application
(3) [1] Without prejudice to any specialized, sector specific, or other relevant legislation that may be issued, the mandatory provisions of this Proclamation shall apply to all environmental matters. [2] As of the date of the coming into force of this Proclamation, any law in force that is inconsistent with the provisions and objectives of this Proclamation shall cease to apply to the extent of such inconsistency with respect to environmental matters. 

CHAPTER II - OBJECTIVES AND GOVERNING PRICIPLES OF THE MANAGEMENT AND PROTECTION OF THE ENVIRONMENT

Objectives
(4) The objectives of the Proclamation include the following: [a] establish the foundation of environmental management and protection laws and provide the institutions and legal instruments for their implementation and enforcement; [b] advance an environmental policy framework consistent with sustainable development; [c] guarantee and promote maximum public and community participation in the conservation, protection and enhancement of the environment; and [d] set up the basis for Eritrea's effective contribution to and benefit from international cooperation in the global efforts for environmental protection.

Principles of Environmental Management
(5) The management and protection of the environment shall be governed by the following principles: [1] Integrated management approach: All elements of the environment are linked and inter-related making it imperative to pursue integrated environmental planning and management. [2] Streamlining environmental protection into sustainable development planning: Environmental protection constitutes an integral component of the process of sustainable development and cannot be considered in isolation from it. [3] Human wellbeing: Human wellbeing is at the centre of concern of the national agenda of development and the protection of the environment. [4] The sovereign right of the State to exploit natural resources: In pursuing sustainable development, the State has a sovereign right to exploit natural resources (biological as well as non biological) within its jurisdiction in accordance with its environmental and developmental policies and to ensure that all activities within its jurisdiction are carried out in harmony with nature and do not cause damage to the environment. [5] Fairness and Equity: Sustainable development can be achieved only when developmental and environmental needs of present and future generations are fairly and equitably met. [6] Environmental rights and duties of persons: Every person in Eritrea has the right to a clean, healthy and scenic environment and the corresponding duty to protect the environment against pollution and degradation as well as to contribute individually and/or collectively to the maintenance and enhancement of the environment. [7] Sustainable use of natural resources: Every person in Eritrea is required to apply sustainable use of natural resources while carrying out economic and social development projects. [8] Preventive and precautionary approach: Preventive and precautionary approach, rather than remedy of or compensation for environmental damage shall be given prominence in the management and protection of the environment. [9] The polluter pays: Any person who causes damage to environment shall be liable to meet the cost of remedying such damage and any resultant adverse health effects and unwarranted social, environmental and economic consequences, as well as the cost of preventing, controlling or minimizing further environmental damage or adverse health effects. [10] Public participation: Public participation is fundamental for the proper management, protection, rehabilitation and maintenance of the environment. [11] International obligations: The State shall undertake global and regional environmental responsibility in a manner that will not cross the national interest.

CHAPTER III - ADMINISTRATIVE ARRANGEMENT

Ministry's Responsibility
(6) [1] The Ministry is hereby entrusted with the overall responsibility for the administration of this Proclamation and the establishment and implementation of an integrated environmental management plan. [2] In consonance with the provisions of this Proclamation, the Minister shall, for and in the implementation of this Proclamation: [a] develop environmental policies, strategies, regulations and directives, and upon approval by the appropriate body, apply all necessary measures to ensure their enforcement; [b] establish a system for environmental impact assessment of developmental projects and activities; [c] determine or cause to be determined, in consultation with appropriate bodies, environmental quality standards or criteria and oversee their implementation or cause the same to be over seen; [d] establish and maintain platforms for collaboration between all stakeholders that are involved in environmental protection; [e] keep the national environment under systematically coordinated monitoring, review and protection and prepare or cause to be prepared at regular intervals a comprehensive assessment report on the state of the national environment and lay the report, along with recommendations as appropriate, before the Council and make it available to the public; and [f] initiate and co-ordinate actions required in a situation of environmental emergency or any other situations which may pose a serious threat to the environment and public health.

Powers and Duties of the Department
(7) [1] The day to day administration of this Proclamation shall be undertaken by the Department of Environment. [2] The Director General shall be accountable to the Minister for the proper discharge of the following duties and functions: [a] direct, supervise and coordinate the day to day functions of the Department; [b] ensure that due attention is given to the environmental concerns in different sectors, through co-ordination with all line Ministries and other relevant agencies; [c] review, approve or disapprove as appropriate, environmental impact assessment reports and environmental impact mitigation plans submitted by project proponents and issue or deny environmental clearance in accordance with the National Environmental Assessment Procedures and Guidelines; [d] promote and raise public awareness on environmental protection and management issues by making available to the public scientific data and other information pertaining to environmental pollution and degradation and environmental protection matters, and mobilize resources for environmental rehabilitation; and [e] carry out such other functions as may be required by the Minister or as may be incidental or conducive to the exercise by the Director General of any or all the functions provided under this Proclamation.

Zoba Environment Branch Office
(8) [1] In every administrative Zoba there shall be a branch office responsible for environment related affairs. [2]. The Zoba Environment Branch Officer shall: [a] promote and organize environmental awareness programmes in the Zoba; [b] monitor the impacts of activities that may affect the environment and take or cause to be taken appropriate measures to ensure observance of the provisions of this Proclamation; [c] Gather and manage information on the state of the environment in the Zoba and submit regular reports to the Zoba Governor and the Director General on all matters relating to the environment and the performance of the functions of the Zoba Environment Branch Office; [d] implement environment related programmes and directives issued by the Ministry and or the Zoba Administration.

Areas at risk
(9) [1] Zoba Administration shall identify within their jurisdiction areas which are at risk of environmental degradation and notify the Ministry of the same, so that necessary and coordinated measures and programmes can be undertaken in order to prevent/avert damage of the environment. [2] An area is at risk of environmental degradation if: [a] it is prone to excessive soil erosion; [b] its vegetation cover has been removed or is likely to be removed at a rate faster than the rate of its replenishment; [c] any human activity is rendering stress on the vulnerable ecosystem (flora and fauna) of the area and or is likely to lead to irreversible environmental degradation and health hazards. [3] The Ministry may, in consultation with the relevant ministries/agencies, develop work plans, guidelines and undertake or cause to be undertaken measures necessary for the rehabilitation and sustainable use of the areas identified as at risk. [4] Vulnerable and highly stressed and sensitive ecosystems shall be given special attention where they are subjected to significant stress by developmental activities and other human usages/activities.

Shared Responsibilities
(10) Notwithstanding the provisions of Article 6 hereof, no person, public or private, shall be relieved from fulfilling their respective responsibilities and obligations to protect the environment and cooperate in supplying relevant information at their disposal.

Environmental Units in Line Ministries
(11) [1] Each line Ministry shall carry out its functions and duties in connection with the environment as prescribed within its defined mandate, provided that such mandate does not conflict with the provisions of this Proclamation. [2] In consonance with the provision of Article 6 of this Proclamation and Sub-article [1] of this Article a line ministry shall establish, as appropriate, an environment unit to undertake the duties and functions as the line ministry may assign to it, but which shall include: [a] responsibility for assuring compliance by that line ministry with the requirements of this Proclamation; and [b] liaison with the Department on matters involving environment and all matters with respect to which co-operation or shared responsibility is desirable or required under this Proclamation. [3] An environment unit or any other body in a line ministry charged with the management of any segment of the environment under any law shall: [a] provide the Department with a copy of annual reports concerning the state of that segment of the environment and the measures taken by the line ministry to maintain or improve the environment; [b] report as soon as practicable to the Department any contravention of any environmental law and or regulation and directive relating to the sphere of responsibility of the line ministry; [c] inform the Department of any suspicion or detection by the line ministry of any contravention of an environmental law beyond its area of mandate and [d] keep a record of all inspections and compliance monitoring exercises and information and environmental data as a result of such monitoring. [4] Every production enterprise and service provider shall have internal procedures and systems of monitoring that their activities do not cause damage to the environment.

CHAPTER IV - NATIONAL ENVIRONMENTAL COUNCIL

National Environmental Council (NEC)
(12) Cognizant of the fact that the environment is a cross cutting issue and the task of its sustainable protection and management requires maximum responsible cooperation and coordination between all stakeholders, there is hereby established a body to be known as the National Environmental Council.

Composition of the Council
(13) NEC shall be composed of Director Generals assigned by the respective ministers to represent the following: [a] the Ministry of Agriculture; [b] the Ministry of Health; [c] the Ministry of Energy and Mines; [d] the Ministry of Land, Water and Environment; [e] the Ministry of Marine Resources; [f] Ministry of Public Works; [g] the Ministry of Trade and Industry; and [h] the Ministry of Transport and Communications.

Functions of the Council (NEC)
(14) [1] The Council (NEC) shall undertake the following functions: [a] identify national priority goals and objectives on environmental protection and enhancement, with due regard to the recommendations of the Minister; [b] promote coordination and co-operation among line ministries in environmental protection programmes and ensure the harmonization of environmental plans and policies of the various sectors; [c] review progress made by line ministries on any aspect of environmental projects and programmes; [d] review reports on the state of the national environment and the implementation of guidelines for integrated environmental management plan and environmental action plan put forward by the Minister; and [e] recommend incentives for the protection of the environment. [2] The Council (NEC) may, if it finds it necessary to facilitate its functions, form a sub-committee composed of officers responsible for environmental affairs in the ministries that are represented in NEC. It may also call on competent persons for scientific and technical advice as it deems necessary.

Council Meetings and Proceedings
(15) [1] The Council shall meet at least twice during each fiscal year at such time and place so determined by the Minister, who shall also serve as its Chairperson. [2] The presence of over half of the members shall constitute a quorum. [3] The Director General shall, with no voting right, attend the Council meetings to keep the minutes. [4] The Council shall, subject to this Proclamation, issue its own working rules and procedures.

Budget
(16) The Minister shall submit to the Ministry of Finance the budget request of the Council necessary to undertake its functions and subject to the appropriate rules and procedures records of disbursement of allocated budget shall be maintained and reports submitted.

CHAPTER V - BASIC ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT TOOLS

National Environmental Management Plan
(17) [1] The Ministry shall, in collaboration with the Council and other appropriate bodies, establish consultative procedures of setting national priorities for the establishment of an integrated national environmental management plan. [2] The national environmental management plan shall identify the principal environmental problems facing the country and provide general guidance for the management and protection of the environment and the development of environmental action plans. [3] The proposed project shall be reviewed by the Council before it is submitted for approval to the appropriate authority. [4] The approved National Environmental Management Plan shall be streamlined into the national strategic development plan and shall constitute and form part and parcel of the same.

Environmental Plan of Action
(18) [1] Line ministries, Zoba Administrations and other relevant government agencies shall, in conformity with the national environmental management plan, develop appropriate plans of action to address the environmental problems in their respective areas of jurisdiction. [2] The environmental plan of action prepared in terms of sub-Article 17[1] hereof shall contain: [a] a description of environment related plan of action prepared by pertinent authority; [b] a description of environmental standards or guidelines established by the line ministry and the policies and programmes that are designed to give effect to the plan; and [c] the degree of compliance required of other persons.

Environmental Permit
(19) No development project or activity shall be implemented without an environmental clearance permit.

Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA)
(20) [1] National Environmental Assessment Procedures and Guidelines shall, as an instrument, be mandatorily applied for proposed projects and activities that are likely to have a significant adverse social and environmental impact. [2] An environment impact assessment or project brief, as the case may be, shall be submitted for review, on all development projects and activities. [3] The types of projects and activities for which EIA statement or project brief is required by reason of their nature, scope and location and the format and procedures of submission and review of the EIA shall be determined as per the National Environmental Assessment Procedures and Guidelines. [4] No licensing authority mandated under any other law shall issue a licence or permit by virtue of any law with respect to a project or activity for which environmental impact assessment shall be required, unless the application for a licence is accompanied by an social and environmental impact assessment that meets all requirements under this Proclamation and regulations issued hereunder. [5] Any line ministry or government agency is authorised to develop sector specific guidelines to assess the social and environmental impacts of a project, provided such guidelines are in consonance with National Environmental Assessment Procedures and Guidelines.

Environmental Audit
(21) All activities of any person involved in economic and social development may be subjected to environmental audit in order to assess to what extent such person complies with the provisions of this Proclamation.

Early Warning and Disaster Preparedness
(22) [1] The Ministry shall, in coordination with relevant government agencies, ensure that an early warning system for environmental disaster and contingency plan for avoiding and/or reacting to mitigate the effects of environmental emergencies is put in place, in particular to deal with: [a] prediction of possible natural calamities and advance dissemination of related information and precautionary recommendations; [b] a situation following a serious accident involving one or more substances, the discharge and disposal of which may endanger human health or the environment; and [c] a situation following a natural catastrophe which may endanger human health, the security of persons and property or the environment. [2] The contingency plans shall include at a minimum: [a] the resources that can be mobilized to deal with the situation; [b] implementation strategies; [c] mandatory measures for informing and protecting the population; and [d] national emergency calls for technical and financial assistance to mitigate disaster eventualities.

National Environment Fund (NEF)
(23) [1] A special National Environment Fund, that shall be used for projects designed to protect, conserve, restore and enhance the environment, including to develop human and institutional capacity needed for the proper management of the environment, shall be established. [2] The sources of the NEF may include: [a] the State treasury contribution; [b] Voluntary contribution from nationals - individuals and or organizations; and [c] Contribution from international and other foreign partners. [3] The financial regulations of the State, regarding accountability and transparency shall be applicable to the administration, disbursement and use of the NEF.

Environmental Information and Public Awareness
(24) [1] Any person shall have the right of access to any information relating to the implementation of the provisions of this Proclamation and to any other law relating to the management of the environment. [2] The Ministry shall, subject to any relevant law, have access to any environmental data and information and shall analyze and disseminate same except where their release would not compromise national security and economic interest. [3] Environmental awareness and the sharing of knowledge and experience shall be promoted and made an integral part of the formal national education curriculum in order to engender values, attitudes, skills and behaviour consistent with sustainable management of the environment. [4] For and in the effective realization of the national environmental management objectives, the Ministry shall, in coordination with line ministries, Zoba Administrations and other stakeholders, carry out public awareness campaigns and training programmes on sustainable environmental protection, conservation and management.

Research on the Maintenance of Eco-system Integrity
(25) Incessant effort shall be exerted to maintain the vivacity, diversity and integrity of the ecological system. To this end: [a] in-depth research shall be promoted to find out the causes of eco-system disturbances and degradation of habitat; [b] results of scientific researches shall be applied to add value and improve existing environmental assets and convert current environmental challenges into opportunities for development as well as to redress habitat loss by maintaining stable and functioning relations between the living and nonliving parts of the environment by preserving biological diversity, reversing degradation of natural resources as well as reclaiming lost ecosystems, where possible; [c] necessary and possible measures shall be undertaken to rescue sensitive, vulnerable and highly dynamic or stressed ecosystems and endangered species; [d] systematic and knowledge based effort shall be exerted to reintroduce lost indigenous flora and fauna; and [e] Lack of scientific information shall be no reason/basis to postpone action to deter potentially significant or irreversible harm to the environment.

Environmental Quality Criteria and Standards
(26) [1] Environmental quality criteria, standards and guidelines for handling toxic and hazardous substances shall be developed through close consultation among appropriate national authorities. [2] The criteria and standards of environmental quality shall, inter alia, address issues of air and water quality, noise, odour, solid and liquid waste, including guidelines for procedures of handling, transport and storage of hazardous chemicals and toxic substances, as well as pesticides and radioactive substances. [3] The establishment of environmental standards and quality criteria shall be based on current scientific knowledge and generally accepted international environmental management practices and practical considerations specific to the particular socio-economic conditions and technological capacities of the country.

Protection of Natural Heritage
(27) [1] The appropriate authority may designate by regulation any area as a national protected area for the purpose of better management of one or more natural resources and their ecosystems. [2] Zoba Administrations and councils of village communities may designate enclosures for purposes of protecting degradation of land and marine resources, preserving vegetation cover and for the sustainable use of the same.

Bio-safety
(28) [1] The Ministry shall promote measures aimed at maintaining the safety and enhancement of the national bio-diversity. [2] Introduction of genetically modified organisms and all types of alien species into the country shall be based on the prior written consent of the competent authority and shall be strictly regulated. [3] The development and use of genetically modified organisms within the country shall be subject to assessment as prescribed by the competent authority in order to ensure that it is ethically accepted and risk free.

Import of Alien Species
(29) [1] Introduction of any alien plant and animal species to the country shall be governed by a special legislation which shall take due consideration of the prevention and mitigation of the impacts of the invasive species. [2] The competent authority mandated with the subject matter shall make stringent scrutiny and regulation to ensure that their adverse effects are prevented or mitigated.

Policy Incentives/Disincentives
(30) [1] Shift towards resource efficiency and decoupling economic growth from environment degrading paths of development shall be promoted. [2] Economic incentives/disincentives shall be used as policy instruments to complement but not substitute legal measures that require the application of environment friendly methods of production, and to the extent possible, to promote reduction of waste and prohibit wasteful consumption of resources.

CHAPTER VI - POLLUTION CONTROL AND WASTE MANAGEMENT

Prohibition of Pollution
(31) [1] Every person shall have the duty to prevent or control pollution and shall not discharge or emit or allow the discharge or emission of any effluent, gases, or solid waste in amounts that would harm the health and wellbeing of humans, plants and animals, microbial species, ecosystems, water resources, soil, air or human settlements. [2] A person who pollutes or causes any other person to pollute the environment in excess of any standards and guidelines established under this Proclamation or applicable international standards shall be liable to clean-up, remove or dispose of the pollutant in such a manner and within such a period as the Department or any appropriate authority may direct and pay the cost to compensate for all the damages caused by the pollution, including the damages inflicted on a third party.

Control of Hazardous and Toxic Substances
(32) [1] No person shall import or export hazardous and toxic substances without acquiring a written permit from the pertinent authority. [2] The production, storage, sale, distribution, import, export and transit of toxic and hazardous chemicals and radioactive substances and their wastes shall be subject to the fulfilment of environmental impact assessment procedures and sound management practices as prescribed by relevant laws or guidelines. [3] The Ministry shall, jointly with the concerned public agencies, develop a register of toxic and hazardous chemicals and substances.

Management and Minimization of Waste
(33) [1] Every person, whose activities generate waste, shall have the duty to responsibly manage the waste and apply necessary measures to minimize it as required by this Proclamation and any other related laws and regulations. [2] The collection, recycling, treatment and disposal of waste without a legal permit shall be prohibited. All persons engaged in such undertakings shall take appropriate precautions to avoid any damage to the environment. [3] All urban and rural settlement administrations shall strive to minimise waste-related environmental problems through the establishment of appropriate waste management and disposal system. [4] Appropriate agencies and other persons responsible for the maintenance of any place, to which the public has access, shall at all times ensure the availability of adequate and sustainable latrines and containers or places for the collection of litters or waste.

Prohibition of Import/Export of Waste
(34) No person shall import/export any waste. Import/export of recyclable materials may be allowed only on a special permit.

Monitoring and Inspection
(35) [1] The Ministry may request and analyse sector-related environmental information from pertinent bodies and designate duly qualified public officers to be environmental inspectors with powers and duties to be specified by regulation. [2] Line ministries and other relevant public agencies shall be responsible for inspection, enforcement and monitoring of compliance with environmental quality standards and the conduct of environmental audit in their respective sectors. [3] Where a line ministry or an appropriate government agency overlooks the task of monitoring compliance with environmental quality standards in their respective sectors, the Ministry shall first notify the line ministry or agency to take appropriate action to ensure compliance with environmental standards. If no appropriate action is taken after the notification, the Ministry shall be empowered to carry out all necessary monitoring, inspections and enforcement duties with regard to what has been overlooked.

Developer's Obligation to Assess and Keep Records
(36) [1] It shall be incumbent upon any developer or owner of a project to continuously monitor and record environmental impacts and consequences during the project commencement and implementation process and thereafter and develop and implement appropriate environmental assessment procedures and guidelines and control for their internal operations. [2] Environmental records of all enterprises and undertakings shall be available for environmental audit, including post-EIA audit, inspection and any other purpose that may be prescribed or required in accordance with this Proclamation and any other applicable laws, regulations and guidelines. [3] Any enterprise and undertaking shall transmit and deliver complete copies of their environmental records to the Department or to any other relevant authority at such intervals as may be determined and appropriately requested by the same.

CHAPTER VII - MISCELLANEOUS

Ongoing Activities
(37) Activities existing at the date of entry into force of this Proclamation shall be monitored to ensure their compliance with the objectives and provisions of this Proclamation and any regulations issued pursuant to it.

Compliance with Standards
(38) Without prejudice to any stricter penalty that may be prescribed in any other law, any person who violates the provisions of this Proclamation or regulations and directives issued hereunder shall be guilty of an offence and be liable, upon conviction, to punishment under the provisions of the Penal Code.

Right to Raise a Civil Case
(39) Any person and community shall have, irrespective of demonstrating a vested interest, a right to bring a civil action against a person whose activity or omission is causing or is likely to cause harm to human health or the environment. The action may: [a] seek prevention or discontinuance of the activity or omission, which is causing or is likely to cause harm to human health or the environment; [b] request that the on-going activity be subjected to an environmental inspection or audit; [c] Request that measures to protect the environment or human health be taken by the person whose activity or omission is causing or is likely to cause harm to human health or the environment.

International Cooperation
(40) Eritrea's participation in and contribution to global and regional partnership for the conservation, protection and restoration of the invaluable health and integrity of the Earth's ecosystems, shall be determined on the basis of "the principle of the commonly shared but differentiated historical responsibilities and socioeconomic conditions and capabilities of nations".

Regulations
(41) The Minister may, for the realization of the objectives of this Proclamation, issue regulations in compliance with this Proclamation.

Entry into Force
(42) This Proclamation shall enter into force as of the date of its publication in the Gazette of Eritrean Laws. 
